


                      SAMPLE STATEMENTS OF WORK FOR
                   FEDERAL COMPUTER SECURITY SERVICES:
                   FOR USE IN-HOUSE OR CONTRACTING OUT




                     Dennis Gilbert, Project Leader
                           Working Group Chair


                         Nickilyn Lynch, Editor





                              June 26, 1992













                       COMPUTER SYSTEMS LABORATORY
             NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

                                ABSTRACT

Each federal organization is fully responsible for its computer
security program whether the security program is performed by in-
house staff or contracted out.  Time constraints, budget
constraints, availability or expertise of staff, and the
potential knowledge to be gained by the organization from an
experienced contractor are among the reasons a federal
organization may wish to get external assistance for some of
these complex, labor intensive activities. 

An interagency working group of federal and private sector
security specialists developed this document.  The document
presents the ideas and experiences of those involved with
computer security.  It supports the operational field with a set
of Statements of Works (SOWs) describing significant computer
security activities.  While not a substitute for good computer
security management, organization staff and government
contractors can use these SOWs as a basis for a common
understanding of each described activity.  The sample SOWs can
foster easier access to more consistent, high-quality computer
security services.  The descriptions apply to contracting for
services or obtaining them from within the organization. 

                      NIST-SPONSORED WORKING GROUP 

                      SAMPLE STATEMENTS OF WORK FOR
                   FEDERAL COMPUTER SECURITY SERVICES:
                   FOR USE IN-HOUSE OR CONTRACTING OUT
 
              PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND REPORT CONTRIBUTORS

Dennis Gilbert *     NIST  Project Leader and Working Group Chair

Nickilyn Lynch *     NIST  Editor

Douglas Arai *       General Service Administration
Jon Arneson * +      NIST 
Michael Arant        Department of Veterans Affairs 
Vernon Bostelman * +       National Institutes of Health 
Nander Brown * +     Small Business Administration 
Dick Costello        Department of Justice
Rita Crawford * +    United States Postal Service 
Grace Culver *       General Service Administration
Dorothea de Zafra    Public Health Service 
Barbara Estrada *    Department of the Treasury
Ellen Flahavin       NIST 
Irene Gilbert *      NIST 
Dara Gordon *        Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Dan Grulke                 Office of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense (Command,                                 Control,
Communications and Intelligence)
Barbara Guttman *    NIST
John Haines          Department of the Interior
Mildred Harrison     Federal Emergency Management Agency
John Ippolito *      COMSIS
Gerald Lang *+       Department of Veterans Affairs
Wayne Madsen         Department of State 
Harris McGarrah      U.S. Coast Guard 
Harold McKee         General Service Administration  
Gary Oran * +        Federal Emergency Management Agency
Nick Pantiuk         Grumman Data Systems
John Przysucha * +   Department of Energy   
Darryl Robbins *     Federal Aviation Administration 
Emily Robinson *     Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Philip Sibert        Department of Energy
Merv Stuckey * +     Bureau of the Census  
Jim Tippett          National Computer Security Center 
Bob Umberger         Department of Labor     

* denotes Report Contributor                + denotes Subcommittee
Chair
NIST - National Institute of Standards and Technology                        SAMPLE STATEMENTS OF WORK FOR
                    FEDERAL COMPUTER SECURITY SERVICES:
                    FOR USE IN-HOUSE OR CONTRACTING OUT

                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                  
   
                                                                  
  
                                                     PAGE

I.  INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I-1
    A. Document Purpose, Scope and Audience . . . . . . . . .I-1
    B. Not a Substitute for Good Computer Security ManagementI-1
    C. Security is not a One-time Activity. . . . . . . . . .I-2
    D. Obtaining Computer Security Services: In-house vs.
       Contracting Out. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I-2
    E. Overview of the Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I-2
    F. The Evolving Nature of this Document . . . . . . . . .I-4
    G. Conventions in this Document . . . . . . . . . . . . .I-5
    H. Additional Sources of Information. . . . . . . . . . .I-5

II.  COMPUTER SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT . . . . . . . . . II-1
    A. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . II-1
    B. Development of a Computer Security Program . . . . . II-2
    C. Program Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . II-7

III.   APPLICATION SECURITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .III-1
    A. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .III-1
    B. Computer Security and Privacy Plan Preparation
           (IAW OMB CIR 90-08). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .III-4
    C. Certification of a Sensitive System  . . . . . . . .III-6
    D. Contingency Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . III-10
    E. Sensitive/Critical Application Review (SCAR) . . . III-14

IV.  INSTALLATION SECURITY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV-1
    A. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV-1
    B. Risk Analysis of a System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV-3
    C. Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations
            Planning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV-8

V.  COMPUTER SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING. . . . . . . . .V-1
    A. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .V-1
    B. Computer Security Awareness and Training . . . . . . .V-2

VI.    COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE. . . . . . . . . VI-1
    A. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VI-1
    B. Incident Response Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VI-2

VII.   SPECIAL STUDIES/PRODUCT EVALUATION . . . . . . . . .VII-1
    A. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .VII-1
    B. Security Evaluation of an ADP Product. . . . . . . .VII-2
    C. Evaluation of Hardware/Software Product That 
            Performs a Direct Computer Security Function . VII-5
    D. Evaluation of a Computer Security Management Aid:
            A Risk Management Tool  . . . . . . . . . . . .VII-8

LIST OF TABLES

TABLE I-1 - Computer Security Areas and SOWs. . . . . . . . .I-3
TABLE I-2 - Major Federal Directives, Computer Security
            Requirements, and Document Sections  . . . . . . I-4

LIST OF APPENDICES

APPENDIX A:  ANNOTATED REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . .A-1
APPENDIX B:  SAMPLE TEXT FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, 
             TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER IN A SOW. . . . . B-1
APPENDIX C:  ALTERNATE TEXT FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, 
             TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER IN A SOW. . . . . C-1
APPENDIX D:  SAMPLE JOB DESCRIPTIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . .D-1
APPENDIX E:  COMPUTER SECURITY AREA AND SOW-SPECIFIC 
             REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .E-1
APPENDIX F:  SAMPLE WORK PLAN DEVELOPMENT TASK STATEMENTS . .F-1
APPENDIX G:  SAMPLE TEXT ON SOW TASK DELIVERABLES . . . . . .G-1
APPENDIX H:  SAMPLE TEXT ON ENVIRONMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
             FOR SOWs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .H-1
APPENDIX I:  SUMMARY TASK LIST OF SOWs. . . . . . . . . . . .I-1

I.   INTRODUCTION

     A.   Document Purpose, Scope and Audience

The Computer Security Act of 1987 and other federal regulations
require federal organizations to develop programs and perform
activities that protect federal systems that contain sensitive
information.  The organization is fully responsible for its
computer security program whether the security program is
performed by in-house staff or contracted out.  There are many
reasons why a federal organization may wish to get external
assistance for some of these complex, labor intensive activities. 
Time constraints, budget constraints, availability or expertise
of staff, and the potential knowledge to be gained by the
organization from an experienced contractor are among factors to
be considered and carefully balanced in deciding whether external
assistance is warranted.  Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Circular A-76, Performance of Commercial Activities, and its
subsequent transmittal memos, provides additional encouragement
and guidance.

The purpose of this document is to help federal information
resources managers (IRMs), computer security officials (CSOs),
and others exercise their computer security responsibilities. 
The document provides sample Statements of Work (SOWs) for often-
performed computer security activities.  Organization staff and
government contractors may use these SOWs as a basis for
understanding each described activity.  The sample SOWs can
foster easier access to more consistent, high-quality computer
security services.    

This document was developed by an interagency working group of
federal and private sector security specialists.  It was further
reviewed by other specialists from both sectors.  The document
presents the ideas and experiences of those involved with
computer security.  It supports the operational field by
describing significant computer security activities.  It is felt
federal organizations can more effectively carry out computer
security responsibilities if clear descriptions of these
activities are available.  

This document addresses obtaining computer security services, not
buying the actual hardware or software that provides security for
a system.  The document applies to systems subject to the
Computer Security Act.  

     B.   Not a Substitute for Good Computer Security  Management

The SOWs are presented as samples and are not intended as "boiler
plate."  Each organization should analyze its specific needs and
determine its functional, resource, and schedule requirements and
constraints.  The SOWs are designed to be modular and flexible,
fitting a variety of situations.  Computer systems, environments,
and organization policies are different, making each computer
security services buy unique.  However, the computer security
activities themselves are similar; this document focuses on those
similarities.

The SOWs are not a substitute for good computer security
management.  They should help those requiring the described
services by providing checklists of tasks to be performed.  The
document is a tool that can save the organization valuable time
and provide important reminders of what needs to be done.  The
document can be of particular value to those trying to establish
a security program; experienced computer security personnel can
also benefit. 

     C.   Security is not a One-time Activity

Security is not a one-time activity.  It is an integral part of
the installation/system lifecycle.  The activities described by
the SOWs in this document generally require either periodic
updating or appropriate revision.  These changes are made when
configurations and other conditions and circumstances change
significantly, or as required by federal regulations.

     D.   Obtaining Computer Security Services:  In-house vs.
          Contracting Out

The SOWs describe activities that can be contracted out or
obtained from within the organization (in-house).  Which method
an organization uses depends on time constraints, budget
constraints, availability or expertise of staff, and the
potential knowledge gained by the organization from an
experienced contractor.  Regardless, there is no substitute for
managers who understand their environment and incorporate
security as an integral part of their computer system activities. 
Each organization has primary responsibility for protecting its
computer systems and the data contained in those systems. 
Acknowledgment and acceptance of this responsibility is of prime
importance.

     E.   Overview of the Document

In this document, related SOWs are grouped together under
computer security "areas."  These areas address the elements of a
well-rounded computer security program.  OMB Circular A-130,
Appendix III identifies application security, information
technology installation security, security awareness and
training, and personnel security as the minimum elements of an
agency computer security program. 

Three of the elements are addressed with SOWs in Section III, IV,
and V of the document.  The fourth element, personnel security,
is not  represented as a separate SOW in this document, but as a
task in the Development of a Computer Security Program SOW in
Section II, Computer Security Program Management.  It is
presented this way because typically the organization's personnel
office and data security office, rather than the computer
security office, have the lead roles in this area.  These offices
normally are responsible for establishing and maintaining
policies and procedures on position sensitivity classification,
personnel security screening, and information confidentiality.  

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III requires agencies to implement
and maintain an automated information systems security program,
including the preparation of policies, standards, and procedures. 
This subject is addressed in this document in Section II,
Computer Security Program Management.

Section VI covers the formation of a Computer Security Incident
Response Team.  Although not explicitly required by federal
directives, forming such a team is one method agencies are using
to deal with the threat of computer security incidents.

Section VII, Special Studies/Product Evaluation, presents a set
of SOWs to perform evaluations of ADP and computer security
products.

The computer security areas and related SOWs are in Table I-1.

TABLE I-1 - Computer Security Areas and SOWs
_________________________________________________________________

DOCUMENT
SECTION        COMPUTER SECURITY AREAS AND SOWS

II   A         Computer Security Program Management
     B         SOW: Development of a Computer Security Program 
     C         SOW: Program Assessment

III  A         Application Security
     B         SOW: Computer Security Plan Preparation 
     C         SOW: Certification of a Sensitive System 
     D         SOW: Contingency Planning
     E         SOW: Sensitive/Critical Application Review (SCAR)

IV   A         Installation Security
     B         SOW: Risk Analysis of a System
     C         SOW: Disaster Recovery and Continuity of
               Operations Planning

V    A         Computer Security Awareness and Training
     B         SOW: Computer Security Awareness and Training

VI   A         Computer Security Incident Response
     B         SOW: Incident Response Team

VII  A         Special Studies/Product Evaluation
     B         SOW: Security Evaluation of an ADP Product
     C         SOW: Evaluation of Hardware/Software Tool that
               Performs a     Direct Computer Security Function
     D         SOW: Evaluation of a Computer Security Management
               Aid: A Risk    Management Tool
_________________________________________________________________
___________________

The areas and SOWs derive, either directly or indirectly, from
requirements contained in major federal directive addressing
computer security.  Table II-2 shows some major computer security requirements, the relevant directive(s), and
the related SOW(s).  Appendix E has additional references.

TABLE I-2 - Major Federal Directives, Computer Security
Requirements, and Document Sections
_________________________________________________________________
MAJOR FEDERAL DIRECTIVES AND                                      
                     DOCUMENT
COMPUTER SECURITY REQUIREMENTS                                    
                     SECTIONS   

Computer Security Act
Computer Security and Privacy Plan (CSPP) Preparation    III.B
Mandatory, periodic security awareness and training      V.B

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III
AIS program                                              II.B,C
Application Security
     Management control process
          Security specifications
          Design review & test
          Certification                                  III.C
     Periodic review & recertification                   III.C
     Contingency plans                                   III.D
Personnel Security
Information Technology Installation Security
     Assignment of responsibility                        II.B
     Periodic risk analysis                              IV.B
     Disaster & continuity plans                         IV.C
     Acquisition specifications
Security Awareness & Training                            V.B
Reports (OMB Cir A-123)                                  
III.C,IV.B

OMB Circular A-123
     Annual control report
          Security & other control weaknesses            III.C 
          Assurance of adequate security of AIS          IV.B
_________________________________________________________________
___________________

Each computer security area is introduced with an overview which
sets the framework for the sample SOWs that follow.  The SOWs
focus on the computer security technical content of the
contract - Purpose, Scope and Tasks.  Appendices B through I
contain examples of contracting-related options.  Local or
organization contracting staff should be consulted for
contracting-related options, as every organization handles these
subjects differently.  This document should not be used to obtain
the described services without first consulting with the
organization's Contracting Officer.

     F.   The Evolving Nature of This Document

The document complements other NIST computer security
publications and will be modified as necessary to meet the needs
of federal organizations.  Experience gained by organizations,
vendors, and others in using this document will contribute to its
improvement.  To that end, your experience with the document is
solicited.  Agencies are also invited to submit relevant SOWs and
comments about their use.  Please address correspondence on this
document to the NIST Computer Security Division, Computer Systems
Laboratory, A216 Technology Building, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

     G.   Conventions in This Document

The SOWs may be used, with appropriate tailoring, by different
levels of a federal organization (e.g., department, agency,
bureau, region, branch, field office, etc.).  The term
organization is used in this document to cover whichever applies.

The document uses the greater-than lesser-than symbols <> in the
SOWs to indicate information the organization will complete.  To
help fill this area with the appropriate information, a generic
term or explanation is used, e.g., organization name.  The
Deliverable Section of each SOW uses the symbol <X>.  This
represents the number of working days from the beginning of the
contract or from the previous milestone, as determined by the
organization.  Elsewhere, when a number is to be filled in, <N>
is used.  All words in <> are in bold typeface.  Instructions to
those tailoring or refining the SOWs are presented as notes,
indicated as [NOTE: ..........].

     H.   Additional Sources of Information

Those tailoring the SOWs in this document may find other NIST
publications valuable.  Those performing the tasks in the SOWs
can also benefit from these publications.  Call the Computer
Systems Laboratory (CSL) at (301)975-2821 to receive NIST
Publication List 91, Computer Security Publications, an annotated
bibliography of NIST computer security documents.  Documents can
be purchased through the Government Printing Office (GPO) at
(202) 783-3238 and the National Technical Information Service
(NTIS) at (703) 487-4780.

CSL Bulletins are published by NIST.  Each bulletin presents an
in-depth discussion of a single topic of significant interest to
the information systems community.  Among the bulletins available
are those on Data Encryption Standard, Guidance to Federal
Agencies on the Use of Trusted Systems Technology, Computer Virus
Attacks, Review of Federal Agency Computer Security and Privacy
Plans, The GOSIP Testing Program, Security Issues in the Use of
Electronic Data Interchange, and File Transfer, Access, and
Management.  Bulletins are issued on an as-needed basis and are
available from CSL Publications, NIST B151, Technology Building,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, telephone (301)975-2821 or FTS 879-2821.

The National Computer Security Center (NCSC) publishes Compusec
Technical Publications, sometimes referred to as the "Rainbow
Series."  Although these documents have been developed to support
the processing and protection of classified data, they contain
information that may be of value to those with sensitive non-
classified environments.  Contact (301) 766-8729 for a list of
publications.

NCSC has a glossary, NCSC-TG-004, Glossary of Computer Security
Terms.  CSL has NISTIR 4659, Glossary of Computer Security
Terminology.  There is also CSL Bulletin, Bibliography of
Computer Security Glossaries, Sept 1990, which describes a number
of glossaries.

NIST sponsors the NIST Computer Security Bulletin Board System
which emphasizes information systems security issues.  The
bulletin board contains various types of awareness and reference
materials, including bibliographies, security-related seminar and
conference lists, and information about actual computer security
incidents and how to protect against or correct known system
vulnerabilities.  The bulletin board's number is (301) 948-5717
(300,1200 or 2400 baud), (301) 948-5140 (9600 baud), voice (301)
975-3359. 

NSA sponsors the National Computer Security Center (NCSC)
Bulletin Board on DOCKMASTER which has over 3000 subscribers and
serves as a focal point for interacting and exchanging computer
security-related ideas among its users.  For information, please
call, in Maryland, (301) 850-4446; outside Maryland, (800) 336-
3625.

NIST, with the National Security Agency (NSA), operates a Risk
Management Laboratory in Gaithersburg, Maryland which
investigates tools and techniques for risk management.  

NIST is also producing a related guidance document "Computer
Security Requirements in Procurement:  A Guide for Procurement
Initiators, Contracting Officers, and Computer Security
Officials," on including security requirements in ADP
acquisitions.  The document addresses computer security in the
procurement cycle, the use of risk analyses in specification
development, gaining assurance, and a list of clauses and
specifications for contracts.  

Please address questions about this document and other NIST
computer security activities to the NIST Computer Security
Division at (301) 975-2934.

For convenience, a copy of this document is available in machine-
readable form.  Making the document available in this manner
facilitates the tailoring and refinement that is such an
important factor in appropriately using the SOWs presented here. 
For further information, please contact CSL Publications at (301)
975-2821.
II.  COMPUTER SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

     A.   OVERVIEW

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III requires agencies to implement
and maintain an automated information systems security program,
including the preparation of policies, standards, and procedures. 
An effective computer security program is an important managerial
responsibility.  Management establishes a positive climate by
making computer security a part of the information resources
management process and by providing support for a viable computer
security program.

Overall computer security program goals are established by
federal regulations and the agency mission.  These goals become
the basis for organization computer security policy.  Specific
security objectives result from computer security program policy
and computer security principles.  Consideration of technology,
resources, security principles, and environmental factors as well
as computer security objectives, are used in developing the
computer security program details. 

The computer security program ensures that compliance
requirements are satisfied and day-to-day operating risks are
cost-effectively minimized.  It also ensures conformance with the
information resources management program and that information
resources are adequately protected.  This protection means
appropriate technical, personnel, administrative, environmental,
and telecommunications safeguards are maintained, and effective
operation of computers and applications supporting critical
organization functions is continued.

Once the computer security program is in place, an organization
should periodically reassess the computer security program goals,
policies, and objectives.  Reassessment is also done as
significant changes occur in its technological, managerial,
economic, or political environment, or in external federal
requirements.  If there has been significant change, the computer
security program is modified accordingly.

A computer security program assessment is a high-level,
qualitative review of the information security program.  This
includes evaluating the degree of compliance with the computer
security program and effectiveness of in-place automated and
manual controls.  The assessment also focuses on the operating
environment, general management practices, and the degree of
managerial support for the computer security program. 

The first sample SOW presented in this section develops a
computer security program and the plan for implementing the
program.  The second SOW is for a computer security program
assessment.
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     B.   Development of a Computer Security Program 

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to develop a computer security program
for <organization name> and the plan for implementing the
program.  The computer security program addresses the security of
information and computing resources at all organizational levels. 


ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor develops a computer security program framework for
<organization name> which includes policy statement(s).  The
framework also addresses the major elements of the program,
resources required (including staff, budget, and equipment), and
milestone/schedules.  The computer security program addresses
compliance requirements, day-to-day operating risks, and
protection of information resources.  

The final product is a computer security program for
<organization name> and a plan for implementing it.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Current Computer Security Status

The Contractor shall, with the assistance of the <computer
security officer or other designated person>, determine the
current computer security program status.  The Contractor shall
determine what computer security program elements and documents
exist.  For those that exist, the Contractor shall review them. 
The Contractor shall note what elements or documents do not
exist.  The review shall examine documentation from: 

     o    application systems certifications, reviews, and risk
          analyses;
     o    information technology installation reviews;
     o    technical software evaluation;
     o    contingency and disaster recovery plans and tests;
     o    personnel security;
     o    computer security awareness and training; and
     o    security management and coordination.

<The Contractor shall conduct an estimated <N> trips to field
installations to assess their computer security program.>

The Contractor shall also review:

     o    applicable federal regulations;
     o    organization mission statements;
     o    organization information management resources policy
          statements;
     o    automated information security goals, policies,
          procedures, and standards;
     o    computer security and privacy plans; and
     o    other associated documents.  

The Contractor shall prepare a report documenting the findings of
this task, including elements or documents that do not exist. 
The Contractor shall deliver the Current Computer Security Status
Report to the Contracting Officer's Technical Representative
(COTR).  

     Task 3 - Develop Framework for the Computer Security
               Program

The Contractor shall develop the framework for the computer
security program.  This framework shall include a draft computer
security policy statement.  The framework shall identify the
major program elements, to include at a minimum: 

     o    personnel security;
     o    end user computing;
     o    application systems security; and 
     o    information technology installation security.

The report shall identify the resources available and/or
required, including staff, budget, and equipment.

The Contractor shall <prepare/revise> a draft <organization name>
computer security goals and policies statement(s).  The goals
shall reflect federal regulations and the agency mission.  The
policies shall reflect the computer security goals.  

The Contractor shall deliver a Computer Security Program
Structure Report and Policy Statement to the COTR.

     Task 4 - Develop Computer Security Program
               Details/Strategies

The Contractor shall develop a set of computer security program
details or strategies to include the following at a minimum; 

     o    personnel security strategy;
     o    end user computing strategy;
     o    application systems security strategy; and 
     o    information technology installation security strategy.

These strategies are outlined in Subtasks 4A-4D below.  Each
strategy shall include the following at a minimum: 

     o    draft position descriptions including authorities and
          responsibilities;
     o    staffing justifications;
     o    resource requirements projections;
     o    budget projections; and
     o    milestones and schedules.

For each strategy, the Contractor shall develop draft policies,
procedures, and standards or identify existing ones.  The
Contractor shall prepare documents for each strategy
incorporating the above elements.

          Subtask 4A - Develop a Personnel Security Strategy

The Contractor shall develop a personnel security strategy.  The
strategy shall address policies, procedures, and mechanisms for
disseminating information on security awareness and training,
automated information access control, and accountability of
operations.  

The Contractor shall coordinate with the <organization name>
personnel office and the data security office.  This is done to
ensure the developed strategy is consistent with <organization
name> policies and procedures on position sensitivity
classification, personnel security screening, and information
confidentiality.  The Contractor shall ensure the strategy
applies to all employees and Contractor personnel whose duties
involve accessing the computer system, system design, development
or maintenance, or handling of sensitive information in hardcopy
or computerized form. 

The Contractor shall deliver the Personnel Security Strategy to
the COTR.

          Subtask 4B - Develop an End User Computer Security
                         Strategy

The Contractor shall develop a computer security strategy
specifically addressing end users.  This strategy shall include
the necessary degree of protection according to the sensitivity
of the information maintained and processed by the user.

As a minimum, the end user computer security strategy shall
cover:

     o    data and system integrity;
     o    confidentiality of data;
     o    access control and accountability;
     o    separation of duties;
     o    computer security awareness and training;
     o    availability of service and continuity of operations;
          and
     o    auditability of operations.

The Contractor shall deliver an End User Computer Security
Strategy to the COTR.

          Subtask 4C - Develop an Application Systems
                    Security Strategy

The Contractor shall develop an application systems security
strategy.  The strategy shall address the safeguards required due
to the nature of the data processed.  A key consideration is the
risk and size of loss or harm that could result from improper
operation or deliberate manipulation of the application.

The following security and control features shall be included in
the strategy at a minimum:

     o    auditability; 
     o    isolation;
     o    controllability;
     o    recoverability;
     o    sensitivity;
     o    identification;
     o    survivability;
     o    availability;
     o    integrity; 
     o    confidentiality; and
     o    <other control objectives>

The Contractor shall also develop guidance for the preparation of
computer security and privacy plans prepared in accordance with
the Computer Security Act and OMB implementing instructions. 
 
The Contractor shall deliver an Application Systems Security
Strategy to the COTR.   

          Subtask 4D - Develop an Information Technology
                    Installation Security Strategy

The Contractor shall develop an information technology
installation security strategy.  This strategy shall include
conducting risk analyses and ensuring disaster
recovery/continuity of operations planning for <organization
name> ADP facilities and contingency planning for <organization
name> application systems.  This strategy shall address
<organization name>'s unique distributed processing environment,
network, and information sensitivity needs.  Included in the
strategy shall be an identification of critical systems and
applications.  It will also cover risk analysis methodologies and
techniques and alternative processing strategies.

The strategy shall address the following at a minimum:

     o    individual accountability;
     o    reliability of service;
     o    separation of duties;
     o    continuity of service;
     o    recoverability;
     o    confidentiality of data; and
     o    resource protection.

The Contractor shall deliver an Information Technology
Installation Security Strategy to the COTR.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLE                                  DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     Current Computer Security Status Report      <X>  *

     Computer Security Program Structure Report
          and Policy Statement                    <X>  *

     Personnel Security Strategy                  <X>  *

     End User Computer Security Strategy          <X>  *

     Application Systems Security Strategy        <X>  *

     Information Technology Installation
          Security Strategy                       <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and others are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]                     SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     C.   PROGRAM ASSESSMENT

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to document the degree of compliance
with the information security program and the effectiveness of
security controls.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.] 

REFERENCES 
 
The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references:  [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

Program assessment is a high-level review of the computer
security program and its implementation to determine what is
lacking and what needs to be looked at in depth, such as:

     o    management procedures and controls;
     o    physical, data, operating system, application software,
          personnel, and network security; and 
     o    disaster recovery. 

Checklists shall be developed to assist in evaluating specific
areas of interest.  The Contractor shall identify problems that
exist and make recommendations.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Management Procedures and Controls

The Contractor shall examine the management procedures that
support security.  This includes a study of the organization
chart, the authorities and responsibilities, and the separation
of functions.  The Contractor shall also provide a list of
management controls to be reviewed in each area (general,
physical, data, and system and application software).  This list
shall, at a minimum, include:

     o    written policies and operating procedures of the data
          center;
     o    malfunction and hardware error reporting procedures;
     o    user job accounting procedures;
     o    efficiency control evaluations; 
     o    organization and reporting hierarchy including proper
          separation of duties; and
     o    development and implementation of security awareness
          and training.

The Contractor shall deliver the Management Procedures and
Controls Report to the Contracting Officer's Technical
Representative (COTR).

     Task 3 - Review Physical Security

The Contractor shall review the physical protection of personnel,
facility, and computer assets.  The Contractor shall develop a
list of physical security procedures and controls in place.  This
list shall include authorizations for access to each area and, at
a minimum include:

     o    physical access controls and their effectiveness;
     o    locks and entry procedures;
     o    air conditioning, uninterruptable power supply, and
          fire suppression and pumping equipment for adequacy and
          proper maintenance;
     o    reports distribution;
     o    protection against hardware and software theft and
          other human and machine-related threats;
     o    procedures for off-site storage of data and software;
     o    procedures for reacting to natural disasters and other
          nature-based threats to the facility, such as flood,
          fire, earthquake, hurricane, or twister; and
     o    personal computer use and software copyright license
          policy.

The Contractor shall deliver the Physical Security Procedures and
Controls Report to the COTR.

     Task 4 - Review Data Security

The Contractor shall examine sensitive and critical databases and
files.  The Contractor shall develop a list for review of data
security techniques and methods, which, at a minimum, shall
include: 

     o    access control, integrity controls, and backup
          procedures;
     o    data element documentation;
     o    sensitive data procedures and implementation;
     o    existing privacy policies and protections;
     o    data access (both the authorization and
          implementation);
     o    application software and how applications are moved
          into production;
     o    written user responsibilities for management of data
          and applications; and
     o    direct access storage device (DASD) management techni-
          ques and the impact on user file integrity.

The Contractor shall deliver the Data Security Techniques and
Methods Report to the COTR.

     Task 5 - Review Operating System Security

The Contractor shall examine the specific operating system.  This
examination shall, at a minimum, include:

     o    review of the operating system and its installation;
     o    backup and restore procedures;
     o    review of system exits;
     o    verification of audit trails; 
     o    review of handling and availability of system logs;
     o    identification of change control procedures
          (installation of new software releases);
     o    check for procedures which ensure that software patches
          are kept current;
     o    review of installation for integrity; 
     o    review interfaces to access control package (if
          installed);
     o    identification of primary access control software and
          files and procedures for ensuring that all software
          runs under its control;
     o    review of access authorizations for appropriateness and
          completeness; and
     o    review of interfaces with the access control package
          for integrity.

The Contractor shall deliver an Operating System Report to the
COTR.

     Task 6 - Review Application Software Security

The Contractor shall review the system development life cycle
(SDLC) used to manage application development and maintenance. 
This review shall minimally include:

     o    methods for developing and documenting application
          controls;
     o    adherence to SDLC:
          -    a review of quality assurance and testing
               procedures;
          -    change control procedures for corrections and
               enhancements;
     o    check for procedures which ensure that software patches
          are kept current;
     o    system documentation and security standards and
          adherence to both; and
     o    application operation and access to applications.

The Contractor shall deliver the Application Software Security
Report to the COTR.

     Task 7 - Review Personnel Security

The contractor shall develop a report which evaluates compliance
with federal and <organization name> personnel security policies
and procedures covering such elements as position sensitivity
classification, personnel security screening, information
confidentiality, and security training and awareness.  The report
shall address whether the policies and procedures cover personnel
in all positions with access to sensitive data.  

The contractor shall deliver the Personnel Security Report to the
COTR.

     Task 8 - Review Network Security

The Contractor shall review network security, evaluating its
confidentiality, integrity, and availability.  This review shall
include, as applicable, access control, authentication, security
administration, type and security of network media, security of
file and print servers, encryption, interfaces between network
and operating system/application software security modules, and
conformance to networking standards.

The Contractor shall deliver the Network Security Review Report
to the COTR.

     Task 9 - Review Disaster Recovery Plans

[NOTE: This Task assumes there is an in-place disaster recovery
plan.  If there is no such plan or it is incomplete, a plan is
done in a separate contract.]

The Contractor shall review the disaster recovery plan for user
involvement, practical application, thoroughness, and
correctness.  The Contractor shall review the most recent test
plans and test results, noting identified deficiencies and
corrective actions incorporated into the plan.

The Contractor shall deliver a Disaster Recovery Review Report to
the COTR.

     Task 10 - Program Assessment Report

The Contractor shall develop a program assessment report which
summarizes overall security compliance.  The report shall detail
major security weaknesses requiring correction and potential
savings.  It shall provide a summary of each area by: area
reviewed, findings, impact of weaknesses in security (if any),
and recommendations of actions that could be taken by management
(if any).  The report shall also identify those areas requiring
more detailed study.

The Contractor shall deliver the Program Assessment Report to the
COTR.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  * 

     Management Procedures and Controls Report    <X>  *

     Physical Security Procedures and Controls
          Report                                  <X>  *

     Data Security Techniques and Methods Report  <X>  *

     Operating System Report                      <X>  *

     Application Software Security Report         <X>  *

     Personnel Security Report                    <X>  *

     Network Security Review Report               <X>  *

     Disaster Recovery Review Report              <X>  *    

     Program Assessment Report                    <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]III. APPLICATION SECURITY

     A.   OVERVIEW

Application security is identified by OMB Circular A-130,
Appendix III as one of the four primary elements of an agency
computer security program.  Each of the SOWs presented in this
section support application security.  As indicated in Section I,
application security activities should be performed in
conjunction with the installation security activities described
in Section IV as part of the organization's whole computer
security program.  Computer security plan preparation,
certification, and contingency planning are discussed below. 
Also discussed is Sensitive/Critical Application Review (SCAR) of
a specific application.

Computer Security and Privacy Plan Preparation (IAW OMB Cir 90-
08)
The Computer Security Act of 1987 imposes three requirements on
federal agencies.  First, each organization must identify systems
which contain sensitive information.  Second, each organization
must establish security plans for those systems.  Finally, each
organization must provide mandatory periodic training for all
persons involved in the management, use, or operation of federal
computer systems that contain sensitive information.  This
section addresses the second requirement, plan preparation.

Each organization identifies its own sensitive systems based on
its unique environment within the scope of the Act.  As defined
in the Act, "sensitive information" is any information, the loss,
misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of which could
adversely affect the national interest or the conduct of federal
programs, or the privacy to which individuals are entitled under
the Privacy Act.  Excluded from the definition is information
that has not been specifically authorized under criteria
established by an Executive order or an Act of Congress to be
kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign
policy.

After identifying a sensitive system, a security plan is
developed.  The current suggested format is in Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin 90-08, "Guidance for the
Preparation of Security Plans for Federal Computer Systems that
Contain Sensitive Information."

A security plan prepared under OMB Bulletin 90-08 should be an
abstract of the detailed security plan for the system.  If a
detailed security plan does not exist, the OMB Bulletin 90-08
plan can be a starting point.  The detailed plan will contain
significantly more information in such areas as risk analysis,
contingency planning, backup procedures, personnel screening and
selection, password management, user identification and
authentication, and audit and variance detection. 

This SOW addresses developing an OMB Bulletin 90-08 plan. 

Certification
A major responsibility of management is to ensure that
information resources are adequately protected.  One method to
meet this responsibility is periodic certification and
accreditation of sensitive systems.  OMB Circular A-130, Appendix
III requires agencies to conduct periodic audits or reviews of
sensitive applications and to recertify the adequacy of
safeguards.  It specifies that this be done at least every 3
years and that audits and reviews be considered part of the
agency vulnerability assessment and internal control reviews
conducted in accordance with OMB Circular A-123.

Certification is a technical review made as part of and in
support of the accreditation process.  Certification shows the
extent to which a particular computer system or network design
and implementation meets a pre-specified set of security
requirements.  It also produces a judgement and statement of
opinion that the accrediting official can use to officially
accredit the system. 

Accreditation is the authorization and approval granted to a
system or network to process sensitive data in an operational
environment.  Accreditation is based on a certification by
designated technical personnel that a system's design and
implementation meets security requirements and achieves adequate
application security commensurate with the risks in the
application's environment. 

Based on the recommendations in the certification report, the
accrediting official issues an accreditation decision.  There are
several accreditation alternatives depending upon results of the
certification evaluation and report.  Accreditation options are:

     o    unconditional accreditation;
     o    conditional accreditation granted with certain
          restrictions;
          -    such as continued operation under specific
               conditions or pending the correction of minor
               security weaknesses;
     o    accreditation withheld or delayed;
          -    pending implementation of procedures or safeguards
               to address major security weaknesses;
     o    accreditation denied;
          -    design and development effort must implement
               required security measures;
          -    system presents a major risk to the organization;
          -    the complete system must be redesigned and
               redeveloped; and
          -    a new certification evaluation is required.

Contingency Planning
OMB Circular A-130, Section III, requires agencies to establish
policies and assign responsibilities to assure development of
appropriate contingency plans and maintenance by end users of
data processing.  This policy is to ensure that essential
business functions will continue if data processing support is
interrupted.  The Circular advises that contingency plans be
consistent with the disaster recovery and continuity of operation
plans for facilities that support sensitive applications.  These
plans are required for all such information technology
installations.  Each hardware system is included in the facility
security plan.  Each sensitive application needs a planned means
of backup and recovery based on the cost-effectiveness of
available alternatives.  A risk analysis that identifies
threats/vulnerabilities should be conducted prior to the planning
process.

A sample SOW for reviewing contingency planning is presented in
this section.  A sample SOW for reviewing disaster
recovery/continuity of operations is presented in Section IV.C. 
Contingency planning and disaster recovery should be viewed as
complementary activities performed taking into account the other. 
Together, they ensure that sensitive applications will have the
necessary environment and resources to function, regardless of
the circumstances.

Sensitive/Critical Application Review (SCAR)
One specific application may need an evaluation.  In that event,
an organization may contract for a sensitive/critical application
review (SCAR).  This review focuses on the security and
criticality of that application.  This section also contains a
SOW addressing this activity.
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     B.   COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY PLAN
               PREPARATION (IAW OMB CIR 90-08)

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES

The purpose of this SOW is to produce a computer security plan
for sensitive systems in the format suggested by Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin 90-08.  This plan will
satisfy a requirement of the Computer Security Act of 1987.  

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES
 
The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for applicable
references and include specific <organization name> directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

Using OMB Bulletin 90-08 as a guideline and with specific
direction from the Contracting Officer's Technical Representative
(COTR), the Contractor shall prepare a security plan for the
following system:

<list system name, size and function such as
brand/model/function/networked>

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Prepare Plan According to OMB Bulletin 90-08

The Contractor shall interview all personnel on the list
provided, read all provided documentation, and prepare an OMB
Bulletin 90-08 plan.  The interview list will consist of <number
of people> in <type of positions such as system managers, users,
functional managers, programmers, operations personnel>.  The
documentation shall consist of the following documents to be
reviewed: <Include the names and types, such as system
documentation, policy, procedures, directives, user manuals,
statutes, handbooks, security plans, contingency plans, risk
analysis results, here or on a separate sheet.>  [NOTE: If the
Contractor is to use other means of obtaining information such as
accessing the system or visiting sites, these activities must be
described here.]  The names of interviewees and the documentation
will be provided by the COTR.  OMB Bulletin 90-08 defines four
sections of a Computer Security Plan.

For Section I, the Contractor shall <analyze/review/verify> and
document the nature of the system and its environment.

For Section II, the Contractor shall <analyze/review/verify> and
document the sensitivity of the system and the information
contained in the system.

For Section III, the Contractor shall explain the degree to which
controls have been implemented and current organization position
as to when new controls will be implemented.  The Contractor
shall document the rationale for not implementing any of the
controls listed in OMB Bulletin 90-08, Section III.

For Section IV, the Contractor shall document relevant comments
or concerns raised during the interview process or plan
preparation. 

The Contractor shall prepare and deliver the Security Plan to the
COTR.  The plan shall incorporate all four sections identified in
OMB Bulletin 90-08.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *

     Security Plan                                <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

Possible intermediate deliverables for complex systems include:
     o    interview reports
     o    drafts in accordance with the three major sections of
          OMB Bulletin 90-08: System Identification, Sensitivity
          of Information, and System Security Measures.

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]

     Government-Furnished Equipment(GFE)/Government-Furnished
     Material(GFM)

No GFE will be provided.  The contractor will be given an
interview list and copies of the documentation referenced in Task
2.  Any other existing documentation pertinent to this system and
to this contract will also be provided.                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     C.   CERTIFICATION OF A SENSITIVE SYSTEM

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES

The purpose of this SOW is to conduct a security certification
review of a sensitive system, <under development/operational> for
<certification/recertification> of the adequacy of controls and
security safeguards.  The objective is to determine whether the
control and security measures implemented on the system are
sufficient to eliminate, contain or mitigate threats and identify
vulnerabilities.  The review follows OMB Circular A-130, Appendix
III and <organization name> regulations on sensitive systems. 
The final report provides enough information to enable the
designated official to make an accreditation decision.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references:  [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The scope of the certification review is an assessment and
evaluation of the controls implemented to ensure the security and
integrity of the system and its software and data.  Systems under
development are evaluated to determine the presence of controls
and security.  

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Determine Security Requirements

The Contractor shall study the system to gain an overall
understanding of the system, its users, functional requirements,
and security requirements.

     Task 3 - Prepare/Review Statement of Systems Security       
               Requirements

The Contractor shall prepare a statement of systems security
requirements.  For operational systems, the Contractor shall
review and revise, as necessary, the existing statement of
systems security requirements.

The Contractor shall deliver the Statement of Systems Security
Requirements to the Contracting Officer's Technical
Representative (COTR).  After revisions are made and approved,
the system shall be rated against the requirements in this
document.

     Task 4 - Perform Basic Evaluation of System
         
The Contractor shall review system documentation, pertinent
regulations, and statutory provisions with which the system must
comply.  The Contractor shall also review and consider the
results of any periodic information technology installation risk
analysis. The Contractor shall evaluate whether:

     o    security requirements are acceptable;   
     o    design or description of security functions satisfy the
          security requirements;
     o    security functions are implemented; and
     o    implementation method provides assurance that security
          functions have been acceptably implemented.

Among the items examined are:

     o    internal controls;
          -    adequacy of internal controls, audit trails, and
               technical security measures;
     o    operational security;
          -    operational and physical security measures;
     o    data integrity;
          -    techniques installed to ensure the integrity and
               reliability of data;
          -    assessment of input, processing, output, and
               manual controls;
     o    system functional requirements;
          -    processing requirements and objectives to be
               minimally successful in meeting user needs;
     o    software integrity;
          -    techniques employed to ensure correctness,
               robustness, and trustworthiness of the software;
          -    (a) construction of easily maintainable programs
               that reflect quality and structure; (b) compliance
               with programming standards; (c) use of
               comprehensive test procedures; and (d) inclusion
               of data error detection procedures; and
     o    test plan and system test results;
          -    test plan, results of system tests, and extent of
               user involvement;
          -    compliance with FIPS (Federal Information
               Processing Standards) on application testing.

If additional evidence is necessary, as indicated by the basic
evaluation, the Contractor shall perform a detailed evaluation
addressing:

     o    whether the controls function properly;
     o    whether controls satisfy performance criteria;
     o    how readily controls can be broken or circumvented; and
     o    if components needing detailed analysis.

The Contractor shall deliver the System Evaluation Report to the
COTR.

     Task 5 - Prepare Control Matrix
         
Based on evaluations in above tasks, the Contractor shall prepare
a control matrix identifying the basic strategy and the control
techniques implemented to contain threats, address
vulnerabilities, and achieve security objectives.  The Contractor
shall review the control matrix and security requirements to
determine where additional safeguards are needed.

The Contractor shall deliver the Control Matrix and Report to the
COTR.

     Task 6 - Prepare Security Certification Report
 
The Contractor shall prepare a security certification report
summarizing the performance results and recommendations of each
above task for the designated accrediting official.  The
statement shall address the adequacy of the security and
integrity measures implemented or under development.

The Contractor shall deliver the Security Certification Report
and Statement to the COTR.

     Task 7 - Prepare Draft Accreditation Decision Statement
               (Optional)
         
[NOTE: Some organizations choose to cleanly separate the
certification and accreditation activities.  Although an
accreditation decision statement is necessary, its inclusion as
part of this SOW is optional.]

Based on the recommendations included in the certification report
and the security certification statement, the Contractor shall
prepare a draft accreditation decision statement for the
designated accrediting official.  The Contractor shall coordinate
the statement with the <organization name> Computer Security
Officer and the designated accrediting official.  The draft
accreditation decision statement will address:

     o    whether the accreditation is conditional or
          unconditional;
     o    if conditional, what restrictions apply to
          accreditation; and
     o    whether the accreditation is withheld, delayed, or
          denied, and what needs to be done to change the
          conditions.

The Contractor shall deliver the Draft Accreditation Decision
Statement to the COTR.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                      DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                             <X>  *  

     Statement of Systems Security Requirements        <X>  *

     System Evaluation Report                          <X>  *

     Control Matrix and Report                         <X>  *

     Security Certification Report and Statement       <X>  *

     Draft Accreditation Decision Statement (Optional) <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
                        STATEMENT OF WORK

     D.   CONTINGENCY PLANNING

[NOTE: Based on the long-stated OMB requirements for agencies to
have contingency plans for their information technology
applications, this SOW assumes there is an in-place contingency
plan.  If there is no such plan, or it is incomplete, a plan may
be developed in a separate contract.  This SOW can be modified
for developing the contingency plan, reflecting the elements
described in the review tasks below.  The references in Appendix
E under Risk Analysis and Program Assessment and the
corresponding SOWs in this document can be useful if either a
risk analysis needs to be done and/or an organization security
plan needs to be developed.  The references in Appendix E under
Contingency Planning contain information regarding emergency
response, damage assessment, backup, and disaster recovery.]

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES

The purpose of this SOW is to review existing contingency plans
for sensitive applications.  The Contractor assesses the validity
and viability of existing contingency plans.  Based on this
assessment, the Contractor recommends changes, if any, to the
contingency plans.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor shall evaluate each selected sensitive application
and its contingency plan.  This SOW encompasses applications
which are processed on various computer platforms (e.g., Pcs,
mainframes, and mini-computers).  This SOW covers the following
systems: <list of sensitive systems>.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Installation Risk Analysis and Organization
               Security Plan 

The Contractor shall review the appropriate <organization name>
installation risk analysis and <organization name> security plan
for the sensitive applications targeted by this SOW.  The
Contractor shall prepare a report documenting this review.  The
report shall address the controls and procedures outlined in the
plan and the requirements of the referenced regulations and
directives.  

The Contractor shall deliver the <organization name> Installation
Risk Analysis and Security Plan Report to the Contracting
Officer's Technical Representative (COTR). 

     Task 3 - Review Contingency Plans

The Contractor shall review existing contingency plans developed
for sensitive applications.  Each review shall evaluate the
current strategy for addressing emergencies and how that strategy
is integrated into the overall security plan.  The Contractor
will also review the results of the most recent contingency plans
test results, including the scenarios used.  The Contractor shall
document the findings of this review in a report.

The Contractor shall deliver the Contingency Plan Review Report
to the COTR. 

     Task 4 - Review Current Emergency Response Procedures
 
The Contractor shall review current emergency response procedures
and evaluate their effect on the continuous operation of the
systems processing sensitive applications.  The review shall be a
step-by-step look at the planned responses and whether they are
adequate to protect lives, limit damage, and minimize the impact
on data processing operations.  The Contractor will also review
the results of the most recent emergency response procedures test
results, including the scenarios used.  The Contractor shall
document the findings of this review in a report.

The Contractor shall deliver the Emergency Response Procedures
Review Report to the COTR.

     Task 5 - Evaluate Damage Assessment Methods

The Contractor shall evaluate the methods used to perform damage
assessment, including their impact on security, and document the
findings in a report.  This report shall cover the methodologies
used for damage assessment.  The Contractor shall specify for
each damage assessment methodology type of use, application, data
integrity violation, and system damage.

The Contractor shall deliver the Damage Assessment Methods
Evaluation Report to the COTR.
 
     Task 6 - Review Backup Procedures

The Contractor shall review the backup procedures, including
documentation of the most recent disaster recovery test, to
assess  adequacy of procedures and security of the system
throughout the process.  The Contractor will also review the
results of the most recent backup procedures test results,
including the scenarios used.  It shall also include backup
transportation, storage, and specific procedures supporting each
sensitive application.

The Contractor shall deliver the Backup Procedures Review Report
to the COTR.  

     Task 7 - Evaluate Disaster Recovery Plan
 
The Contractor shall evaluate the disaster recovery plan to
determine its adequacy in providing a temporary or longer
operating environment.  The review shall cover required levels of
security to see that they continue in force throughout the
process of recovery, temporary operations, and the move back to
the original processing site or to the new processing site.  The
Contractor will also review the results of the most recent
disaster recovery test results, including the scenarios used. 
The Contractor shall document the review in a report.

The Contractor shall deliver the Disaster Recovery Evaluation
Report to the COTR.  

     Task 8 - Prepare a Summary Report

The Contractor shall provide a summary report of all findings. 
The report shall take into account the risk analysis and disaster
recovery planning procedures.  The report shall address the plan
for each sensitive application and data facility.

The Contractor shall deliver the Summary Report to the COTR in
draft form.  After revision, the final version shall be delivered
to the COTR.

     Task 9 - Prepare a Detailed Recommendations Report

The Contractor shall prepare a detailed report recommending
changes to the contingency plan.  It will include:

     o    a list of all documents reviewed or evaluated in the
          above tasks, recommendations made, personnel involved
          in the review, and recommendations impact;
     o    an estimate of the effort and cost associated with the
          recommendations;
     o    the scenarios for testing the plan;
     o    determination of how dependencies, any assistance
          needed from outside organizations, as well as
          difficulties in obtaining essential resources, impact
          on the plan; 
     o    a list of priorities observed in recovery operations
          and the rationale in establishing those priorities; and
     o    a discussion of how these recommendations can be
          incorporated to support the organization security plan.

The Contractor shall submit the Detailed Recommendations Report,
first in draft form and then as a finished deliverable, to the
COTR. 

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     <organization name> Installation Risk 
          Analysis Security Plan and Report       <X>  *

     Contingency Plan Review Report               <X>  *

     Emergency Response Procedures Review Report  <X>  *

     Damage Assessment Methods Evaluation Report  <X>  *

     Backup Procedures Review Report              <X>  *

     Disaster Recovery Evaluation Report          <X>  *

     Draft Summary Report                         <X>  *

     Detailed Recommendations Report              <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)
 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     E.   Sensitive/Critical Application Review (SCAR)

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to perform a security review of a
sensitive/critical application of the <Application Name>.  

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor shall evaluate the security and criticality of a
computer application, <application name>.  This shall form the
basis of a technical certification and judgments about acceptance
of the level of risk, i.e., accreditation by an authorized
organization official.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Prepare a SCAR Work Plan

The Contractor shall conduct an initial site survey.  Upon
completion of the site survey, the Contractor shall develop a
work plan and present it to the Contracting Officer's Technical
Representative (COTR). 

This work plan shall include the following:

     o    a statement of the Contractor's approach to the project
          including a description of specific procedures,
          methodology, and techniques to be employed in
          conducting the SCAR; 
     o    a schedule for site visits, the identification of
          specific organizations and organization staff to be
          interviewed, the specific elements of information to be
          gathered during the visits, and an outline of the
          entrance and exit briefings at each site; and
     o    areas of potential weakness identified, and testing (if
          any) to be performed. 

The <organization name> will review and approve the plan or
return it for revision.  Task 2 will not begin before plan
approval.

     Task 2 - Perform Data Collection

The Contractor shall perform data collection according to the
SCAR Work plan.  This data will include at a minimum for the
<Application Name>:

     o    OMB Bulletin 90-08 Computer Security and Privacy Plan;
     o    assignments of responsibility;
     o    security specifications;
     o    design reviews and test results;
     o    audits results and certification and accreditation
          statements; and
     o    contingency plans.

     Task 3 - Prepare SCAR Report

The Contractor shall analyze the information collected during
Task 2 and prepare a SCAR report.  The SCAR report shall contain
the following:

     o    an executive summary of not more than two pages;
     o    a discussion of the objectives and authority for the
          review;
     o    a description of the application and its criticality
          and sensitivity status at the time the review was
          conducted;
     o    the identified strengths and weaknesses in the
          application's security/internal control procedures
          (automated and manual);
     o    the recommendations for improvements (if any), rated as
          to their potential effect on the security environment
          (low, moderate, high) and an implementation priority
          proposal; and
     o    a draft certification statement which includes the
          Contractor's recommendation whether the application
          should be certified acceptable, not acceptable, or
          acceptable with qualification.  If the Contractor makes
          a recommendation of certification with qualification,
          the draft certification statement shall also include
          those recommendations that must be implemented to
          obtain an unqualified acceptable certification.

The Contractor shall deliver the SCAR Report to the COTR.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     SCAR Report                                  <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
IV.  INSTALLATION SECURITY

     A.   OVERVIEW

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III identifies installation security
as  an element of an agency computer security program.  Each of
the SOWs presented in this section support installation security. 
As indicated in Section I, installation security activities
should be performed in conjunction with the application security
activities described in Section III as part of the organization's
whole computer security program.  Risk analysis and disaster
recovery/continuity of operations are discussed below.

It should be noted that an installation or network, especially
one that supports more than one application, may require its own
Computer Security and Privacy Plan.  If that is the case, refer
to Section III.B.
 
Risk Analysis
Risk management is an iterative process that ensures reasonable
steps are taken to protect automated information resources.  Risk
management seeks cost-effective safeguards against deliberate and
accidental threats to computer system availability, data
integrity and confidentiality.  Managing risks involves
identifying information assets and threats, assessing their
potential impact and severity, and selecting appropriate
safeguards.  Computer security program assessment and risk
analysis are part of risk management.  One cannot have a full
risk management process without the results of a program
assessment and risk analysis.  The results are presented to the
organizations' management for a decision about the acceptable
risks versus the cost of safeguards that can be implemented.

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III requires agencies to establish
and maintain a program to conduct periodic risk analysis at each
installation to ensure that appropriate, cost-effective
safeguards are incorporated into new and existing applications. 
The results of the risk analysis are taken into account by the
official (re)certifying/accrediting the sensitive applications
being processed at the installation.  The risk analysis is also
used in the evaluation of general controls over the management of
information technology installations conducted in accordance with
OMB Circular A-123.  A risk analysis is required to be conducted
at intervals consistent with the data processed, but at least
every 5 years.

Risk analysis is the cornerstone of a risk management program,
forming the basis for selecting cost-effective security controls. 
A risk analysis should, at a minimum, perform the following
functions:

     o    identify and value assets; 
     o    identify threats and vulnerabilities;
     o    consider the environment and review the effectiveness
          of current system safeguards; 
     o    provide a risk calculation; 
     o    optionally, perform a cost-benefit analysis; and
     o    recommend safeguards and develop a safeguards
          implementation plan.

The risk analysis SOW can be used to conduct a risk analysis of a
computer facility, installation, or a communications network. 
The system may be in-place or under development. 

Although there are common elements and concerns in both program
assessment and risk analysis, program assessment is a broader
look at the computer security environment.

Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations Planning 
OMB Circular A-130, Section III, requires agencies to maintain
continuity of operations plans for all information technology
installations.  This is to provide continued data processing
support in the event that normal operations are prevented.  These
plans should be consistent with the contingency plans for the
applications running on the installation and based on the cost-
effectiveness of available alternatives.  A risk analysis that
identifies threats/vulnerabilities should be conducted prior to
the planning process.

Reasonable continuity of operations is achieved by careful
planning for an appropriate response to any interruption in data
processing service.  The elements to be considered include
incident response, off-site storage, backup and recovery, and
disaster/move planning.  Disaster recovery and continuity of
operations plans must be fully documented and tested
periodically.  For large facilities or those that support
mission-essential/critical functions, these plans should be
tested annually.  Recovery plans must ensure that there is
sufficient computer capacity to absorb the added workload from
the damaged site in a timely manner for all sensitive
applications and that backups are current.  Staff must be trained
to carry out procedures.  These procedures need to include the
management of communications among support systems.

Newer environments, such as distributed mini-computers linked by
wide-area networks, local area networks of personal computers,
and standalone multi-user and single user processors, present new
concerns that must be addressed.  

A SOW for disaster recovery and continuity of operations planning
is presented in this section.  A SOW for contingency planning is
presented in Section III.D.  Contingency planning and disaster
recovery should be viewed as complementary activities, one taking
into account the other.  Together, they ensure that sensitive
applications will have the necessary environment and resources,
regardless of the circumstances.
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     B.   RISK ANALYSIS OF A SYSTEM

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to conduct a risk analysis.  The risk
analysis will include at a minimum:

     o    identification and evaluation of
          computer/communications network assets;
     o    identification of potential threats to those assets;
     o    assessment of adequacy of existing management,
          operational, and technical controls in safeguarding
          assets against waste, loss, unauthorized access and
          use, and misappropriation; and
     o    analysis of the consequences/impact of the potential
          threats resulting in safeguard recommendations.

An optional task will be to recommend cost-effective safeguards
to reduce risks to an acceptable level. 

ENVIRONMENT

[Note: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

A risk analysis on the <computer facility/installation or
communications system name> will be conducted.  

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Select Methodology for Risk Analysis (Optional)

[NOTE: The organization may specify a specific risk analysis
methodology or tool is to be used.  If the organization does not
designate a methodology or tool, then this task should be
performed.]The <Contractor or organization name> shall select the technique
for estimating the probability and results of the occurrence of
harmful events.  The risk analysis methodology selected should
include the following basic parts:

     o    data collection necessary for the analysis;
     o    asset valuation;
     o    threat analysis; 
     o    safeguards effectiveness analysis;
     o    risk calculation;
     o    safeguards recommendations; and 
     o    optionally, cost-benefit analysis.

The Contractor shall deliver a Methodology Selection Report to
the COTR, explaining the rationale for selecting the methodology.

     Task 3 - Data Collection

The Contractor shall collect the data required to support the
risk analysis methodology selected in Task 2 or specified by the
organization.  The validity of the results of the risk analysis
is a direct reflection of the accuracy of the input.  The
requirements for the data collection task are:

     o    establish system boundaries;
     o    value assets;
     o    identify threats; and
     o    identify weakness in current safeguards systems.

          Subtask 3A - Establish System Boundaries

The Contractor shall establish the boundaries of the system under
analysis.  Establishing parameters in which the system operates
guarantees consideration of all security issues.  Particularly,
distributed systems and networks associated with the system
should be considered.

Interviews shall be conducted with senior installation and
project managers, user managers, and their staff.  A review of
system documentation shall be conducted.

          Subtask 3B - Value Assets 

The Contractor shall collect from the organization a complete
list of assets, their value, sensitivity, and importance to the
business  of the organization.

Assets are defined as valuable objects that require protection
from harm or compromise.  Assets include information, data,
hardware, environmental equipment (heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC)), inventories, documents, personnel, real
property, reputation, and services.

          Subtask 3C - Identify Threats 

The Contractor shall identify the threats to the system(s).  This
shall include both deliberate and accidental causes.  Deliberate
threats are those caused by people, and include willful damage,
misuse of system resources, theft, and others.  Accidents that
threaten assets include acts of nature, errors by people, and
malfunction of hardware and equipment.

          Subtask 3D - Identify Weaknesses in Current
                    Safeguards Systems

The Contractor shall analyze the effectiveness of security
measures as an integral part of risk analysis.  This shall
include weaknesses in the organization's protection strategy that
would illustrate not only ineffectiveness, but nonexistence of
appropriate controls.  The safeguards to evaluate fall into these
categories:

     o    administrative security; 
     o    physical security;
     o    software security;
     o    hardware security;
     o    personnel security;
     o    environmental security; and
     o    communications security.

     Task 4 - Risk Calculation

The Contractor shall determine the effect that a successful
threat could have upon the organization.  The risk calculations
result from analyzing the values in Task 2 (asset values,
relative weakness of current safeguards, and relative strength of
the dynamic threat).

The calculation results shall be expressed in quantitative or
qualitative terms.  A quantitative approach produces results
expressed in monetary terms, while a qualitative method makes use
of phraseology and linguistic values.

The Contractor shall design the Risk Analysis Report in a manner
that contributes to its use by the organization.  The Contractor
shall deliver the Risk Analysis Report to the COTR.

     Task 5 - Cost-Benefit Analysis Report (Optional)

[NOTE: While the cost-benefit analysis is a necessary step in
risk management, its inclusion in a risk analysis is optional. 
Therefore this task is optional in the SOW.]

The Contractor shall develop a cost-benefit analysis to provide a
basis for selecting safeguards.  The analysis shall describe
safeguards that are both mutually supportive and cost-effective. 
The cost-benefit analysis report shall outline how much each
proposed safeguard will cost and how much the it will reduce
exposure.  The Contractor will examine mutually supportive
combinations of safeguards and prioritize them based on cost-
benefit.

The Contractor shall deliver a Cost-Benefit Analysis Report to
the COTR.  

     Task 6 - Safeguards Recommendations (Optional)

The Contractor shall prepare a Safeguards Recommendations Report. 
The report shall recommend safeguards to minimize the impact of
threats to the system.  The report shall prioritize mutually
supportive combinations of safeguards so as to minimize the
organization's losses.

The Contractor shall deliver the Safeguards Recommendations
Report to the COTR.

     Task 7 - Develop a Safeguards Implementation Plan
               (Optional)

Contractor shall develop a plan for implementing the safeguards
selected by the organization.  The plan shall include:

     o    where and how to obtain the safeguards;
     o    staff and skills to operate or maintain the safeguards; 
          
     o    budget projections; and
     o    milestones and schedules.

The Contractor shall deliver the Safeguards Implementation Report
to the COTR.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     Methodology Selection Report (Optional)      <X>  *

     Risk Analysis Report                         <X>  *

     Cost-Benefit Analysis Report (Optional)      <X>  *

     Safeguards Recommendations Report (Optional) <X>  *

     Safeguards Implementation Report (Optional)  <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts and other are found in Appendix B.  Some organizations
have their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK
 
     C.   DISASTER RECOVERY AND CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS
               PLANNING

[NOTE: Based on the long-stated OMB requirements for agencies to 
maintain disaster recovery and continuity of operations plans for
all information technology installations, this SOW assumes a
disaster recovery and continuity of operations plan is in-place. 
If there is no such plan or it is incomplete, a plan can be done
in a separate contract.  This SOW can be modified for developing
the disaster recovery and continuity of operations plan
reflecting the elements described in the review tasks below.  The
references in Appendix E under Risk Analysis and Program
Assessment and the corresponding SOWs in this document can be
useful if either a risk analysis needs to be done and/or an
organization security plan needs to be developed.  The references
in Appendix E under Disaster Recovery and Continuity of
Operations Planning contain information regarding emergency
response, damage assessment, backup, and disaster recovery.]

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES

The purpose of this SOW is to review and improve the
effectiveness of the disaster recovery and continuity of
operations plan for a <type of facility(ies)> facility.  The
effort will ensure reasonable continuity of data processing
support should normal operations be interrupted.  The disaster
recovery and continuity of operations plan is integrated into the
contingency plans for the sensitive applications operating at the
facility.  The plan should be documented and tested periodically
at a frequency consistent with the loss that could result from a
disruption in service.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor reviews the disaster recovery and continuity of
operations plan and recommends ways to increase the effectiveness
of the plan.  This plan must cover the following systems: <List
of sensitive systems>.
TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Installation Risk Analysis and
               <Organization Name> Installation Security Plan

The Contractor shall review the appropriate <organization name>
installation risk analysis and the <organization name> security
plan.  The Contractor shall prepare a report documenting this
review.  The report shall cover how the controls and procedures
outlined in the plan address the requirement of the referenced
regulations and directives.

The Contractor shall deliver the <organization name> Installation
Risk Analysis and Security Plan Report to the COTR. 

     Task 3 - Review Contingency Plans
 
The Contractor shall review existing <organization name>
contingency plans for the sensitive applications, identifying the
general nature of emergencies that are likely to occur, and
determine a comprehensive continuity of operating strategy.  Each
plan review shall evaluate current strategy for addressing
emergencies and their integration into the overall security plan. 
The Contractor will also review the results of the most recent
contingency plans test results, including the scenarios used. 
The Contractor shall document the findings of this review in a
report.

The Contractor shall deliver the Contingency Plan Review Report
to the COTR. 

     Task 4 - Review Backup Procedures

The Contractor shall review all system backup procedures.  The
Contractor will also review the results of the most recent backup
procedures test results, including the scenarios used.  The
review ensures that during the recovery of a failed system and/or
the move of a system during a disaster, all controls normally in
place remain intact.   

The Contractor shall deliver the Backup Procedures Review Report
to the COTR.  

     Task 5 - Review Continuity of Operations/Disaster
               Recovery Move Plan

The Contractor shall review the continuity of operations/disaster
recovery move plan to ensure that it provides continuous support
for systems during or following a major disaster at the computer
facility or when difficulties disable a computer system.  This
plan includes restoring the computer system in its original
environment.  The Contractor will also review the results of the
most recent continuity of operations/disaster recovery move plan
test results, including the scenarios used.  Any discrepancy in
the plan for restoration shall be documented.

The Contractor shall deliver the Continuity of
Operations/Disaster Recovery Move Plan Review Report to the COTR. 
  

     Task 6 - Examine Procedures and Practices for Off-Site
               Storage

The Contractor shall examine procedures and practices for off-
site storage.  This includes:

     o    inventory all data files required by each system; 
     o    check timing of backup and retention of data files; 
     o    walk through the off-site storage procedures for system
          backup;
     o    examine the off-site storage facility for adequacy of
          protective controls;
     o    review procedures for delivery of the backup systems to
          the recovery facility/site;
     o    check for backup copies, adequacy, and location of
          backup documentation; and
     o    check on security maintenance for off-site storage.

The Contractor shall deliver the Procedures and Practices for
Off-Site Storage Evaluation Report to the COTR.   

     Task 7 - Disaster Recovery Test Procedures Review

The Contractor shall evaluate and report the effectiveness of
disaster recovery test procedures.  The report should include an
evaluation of the procedures for documenting weaknesses and a
discussion of how security is tested in the recovery/backup
system.

The Contractor shall deliver the Disaster Recovery Test
Procedures Review Report to the COTR.    

     Task 8 - Evaluate ADP Backup Processing Alternatives

The Contractor shall identify and compare ADP processing
alternatives against those currently employed. 

The Contractor shall deliver a ADP Backup Processing Alternatives
Report in draft form to the COTR.  

     Task 9 - Prepare a Summary and Recommendations
               Report

The Contractor shall develop a summary of all findings.  This
summary shall become input to the risk analysis and contingency
planning procedures.  The Contractor shall also prepare a
detailed recommendations report.  The Contractor shall describe
how the recommendations can be incorporated to support the
organization security plan.  The report shall include:

     o    list all documents reviewed or evaluated in above
          tasks, recommendation made, personnel involved in the
          review, and recommendations impact;
     o    estimate the effort and cost associated with the
          recommendations;
     o    specify the scenarios designed for the plan;
     o    determine how dependencies, any assistance needed from
          outside organizations, as well as difficulties in
          obtaining essential resources, impact on the plan; and
     o    list the priorities observed in recovery operations and
          the rationale behind those priorities.

The Contractor shall submit a Recommendations Report, first in
draft form and then, following comments by the COTR, as a
finished deliverable.  

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     <organization name> Installation Risk
          Analysis Report and Security Plan       <X>  *

     Contingency Plan Review Report               <X>  *

     Backup Procedures Review Report              <X>  *

     Continuity of Operations/Disaster Recovery
          Move Plan Review Report                 <X>  *

     Procedures and Practices of Off-Site
          Storage Evaluation Report               <X>  *

     Disaster Recovery Test Procedures Review
          Report                                  <X>  *

     ADP Backup Processing Alternatives Report    <X>  *

     Recommendations Report                            <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
V.   COMPUTER SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING
 
     A.   OVERVIEW 

Federal organizations have a mandatory requirement to provide
computer security awareness and training for employees
responsible for management and use of federal computer systems
that process sensitive information.  To satisfy the requirement,
organizations should ensure that employees receive training which
covers the basics of computer security as well as courses
specific to the needs of the employee.

The computer security awareness and training requirement is based
on federal regulations which emphasize this as an element of
resources management.  These requirements are derived from Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Appendix III,
Security of Federal Automated Information Systems, and Public Law
100-235, the Computer Security Act of 1987.

                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     B.   COMPUTER SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to develop a computer security
awareness and training course specific to <organization name>. 
This course may be conducted by organization staff or by
Contractor staff under a separate contract.  The course
encompasses lesson plans, training aids, hand-out material, and
periodic visual reminders for heightening awareness.

The Contractor develops a computer security awareness and
training course tailored to the organization's needs.  This
contract requires the development of computer security awareness
training materials tailored to the organization's needs which may
be used by a contractor or by the organization, in subsequent
training sessions.
 
At a minimum, the Contractor shall include one or more of the
five basic subject areas into a computer security awareness and
training plan for the specific audience categories within the
organization.  The five basic subject areas are:
 
     o    computer security basics;
     o    security planning and management;
     o    computer security policies and procedures;
     o    contingency plan/disaster recovery planning; and
     o    systems life cycle management.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor shall design and develop an Instructor's Guide and
a participant material packet for a classroom-based course.  The
Instructor's Guide will provide the instructor with guidance for
presentation of the course.  The participant material packet will
provide the participant with the materials discussed in the
course for future reference.  The Instructor's Guide and the
participants material shall be designed for distribution in a
three-ring binder.  This will facilitate updating.

These items shall be included in the Instructor's Guide: 
 
     o    a table of contents;
     o    a list of materials required to present the course;
     o    a list of frequently used acronyms;
     o    approximate time estimates to present each section;
     o    references to other manuals and guides on security
          awareness and training; and
     o    hardcopies of the transparencies.
 
These items shall be included in the participant material packet:


     o    a table of contents;
     o    an agenda;
     o    a list of organization-specific and federal regulations
          and policies;
     o    a reference list of manuals and guides for more
          security  awareness information;
     o    an acronym listing; and
     o    hardcopies of the transparencies.
 
The Contractor shall design two versions of a text-only cover for
the Instructor's Guide and the participant materials.  The
<organization name> will review the covers and make a selection
with possible changes to be incorporated in the final
reproducible covers. 
 
The Contractor shall submit to the organization all course
materials for review.  The Contractor shall meet with the
organization to discuss revisions.  Any revisions shall be
incorporated in a revised draft and submitted to the
organization.  The Contractor shall meet with the organization to
present the final draft before presenting the course to the
training participants.  

The Contractor shall submit to the organization: 
 
     o    two copies each of the draft, revised draft,
          reproducible  master of the Instructor's Guide,
          participant materials, and transparencies;
     o    final machine-readable copy of all course materials
          <specify machine, software and version>; and
     o    reproducible covers for the Instructor's Guide and
          participant materials.

The purpose and course objectives are to be stated for each
course.  If videos are used, they shall be submitted to the
organization IRM Systems Security Officer for review. 

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Develop Course Outline and Master Lesson Plan

The Contractor shall develop a master lesson plan and supporting
course material for each audience category within the
organization.  The guidelines for this task are in the task
description section.

The Contractor shall present the Course Outline and Master Lesson
Plan to the computer security staff.

     Task 3 - Develop Lesson Plan for Each Audience Category

The Contractor shall develop a lesson plan and supporting course
material for each audience category within the organization.  The
guidelines for this task are in NIST SP 500-172, Computer
Security Training Guidelines.

The Contractor shall present each Lesson Plan and Supporting
Course Material for each audience category to the computer
security staff.  

     Task 4 - Conduct Pilot Class

The Contractor shall conduct a pilot class for each course
developed and use an evaluation methodology approved by the
organization to measure course results.  

     Task 5 - Final Course Materials

The Contractor shall submit the final Instructor Guide and
Participant Material Packet to the Contracting Officer's
Technical Representative (COTR).  This shall include all
supporting material developed in the above tasks. 

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     Course Outline and Master Lesson Plan        <X>  *

     Lesson Plan and Supporting Course Material
          for each Audience Category              <X>  *

     Conduct Pilot Class                          <X>  *

     Instructor Guide and Participant Course

          Material                                <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]

     Government-Furnished Equipment (GFE)/Government-Furnished
     Materials (GFM)

The organization shall furnish the space in which the training
will be conducted, the required reproduced copies of the
Instructor's Guide and participants materials, and the necessary
audio/visual equipment. 
VI.  COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE

     A.   OVERVIEW

Government organizations increasingly need the ability to handle
computer security incidents.  A computer security incident is any
event in which a computer system is attacked, intruded into, or
threatened with an attack or intrusion.  Thus, examples of
computer security incidents include viruses, worms, Trojan
horses, hacker events, hoaxes, and extortion.  

The primary activity of an incident response team is to provide
assistance to sites when such aid is requested.  This help
includes assessing the nature and extent of damage to computer
systems, coordinating technical efforts to develop and collect
software `patches' for problem resolution, advising site
personnel on damage control and recovery procedures, and
providing direct support on computer security-related problems.

It should be noted that other organizations provide incident
response support.  The activities of these organizations should
be considered in developing the organization's computer security
incident response capability.  Based on this consideration, some
of the tasks described in this SOW may be optional.  This may be
especially true for a small organization with limited resources. 
See NIST Special Publication 800-3, Establishing a Computer
Security Incident Response Capability (CSIRC) for further
information.

This SOW presumes the organization has made a determination that
a centralized approach to computer security incident response
will be used.  The above NIST Special Publication can be useful
in determining the appropriate placement of this capability
within the organization. 

See Appendix E (Computer Security Incident Response) for further
information prior to doing the SOW described below. 
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     B.   INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM 

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to form a Contractor Incident Response
Team to provide virus and incident response capability to support
<organization name>.  This will include incidents such as
viruses, worms, or other malicious code, intrusions, hoaxes and
insider attacks.  This team, when requested by an <organization
name> site, will also assist in analyzing any unusual or
unexplained event that may involve computer or network security.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor will form an Incident Response Team (the team) to
increase the <organization name>'s ability to respond to computer
security incidents.  The team will provide <N> hours a day on-
call technical assistance to <organization name> sites and
respond to  incidents at those sites within <N> hours.  The team
will also communicate important information about threats and
vulnerabilities to the organization in a timely manner.

The team charter will involve proactive efforts.  These include
developing incident handling guidelines, identifying software
tools  for responding to incidents/events, and conducting
training and awareness activities.

The team may also perform research on viruses, conduct system
attack studies, and develop computer security tools.  These
efforts will provide knowledge that the team can use and
information to issue before and during incidents.  In addition,
the team will maintain a clearinghouse of relevant information
and help sites learn about and use the computer security tools
which they have developed.

This project is responsible for specific deliverables (e.g.,
incident-handling guidelines, software tools, etc.).  The project
is an on-going, multi-year effort.  The team will identify,
isolate, neutralize and be responsible for handling malicious
programs (viruses, worms, Trojan Horses) infecting <organization
name> systems and/or networks.  

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

[NOTE: Some of the following tasks are independent of the others. 
All of them may not be necessary in a particular environment. 
Each task should stand on its own merits, considering
organization requirements, resources and the sensitivity of the
activity.]

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Establish Incident Response Team

The Contractor shall form an Incident Response team (the team) to
provide direct technical assistance.  This aid shall include
on-site presence at the <organization name>'s sites request.  The
objective is for the team to provide to every site requesting
aid, sufficient support to solve the technical problems created
by the incident.

The team shall establish and maintain an office at <organization
name> headquarters that will be the center for conducting team
activities.  The center shall also house the computers and other
hardware needed to handle communications with other sites.

     Task 3 - Establish a Clearinghouse

The team shall develop a clearinghouse for <organization name> to
locate pertinent information about previous incidents, known
viruses and worms, known vulnerabilities of systems, and key
people to contact.  This clearinghouse shall include information
about security clearances needed by key computer security and
technical personnel at each site.  The team shall develop an
automated tracking system to track incidents.

The Contracting Officer's Technical Representative (COTR) will
review the Automated Tracking System and Clearinghouse. 

     Task 4 - Develop Cooperative Procedures

At the organizations's discretion, the team shall form
cooperative procedures between <organization name> and other
federal organizations.  Part of the team's task shall be to
develop procedures for incident reporting.  These procedures
define who is contacted during an incident, what kind of
information is shared, who performs a particular task, and how
subtasks are divided under different types of incidents and
conditions.  The team shall develop cooperative relationships
with vendors to learn of security holes and fixes.  The team
shall also work with vendors to ensure problems are fixed.  The
Contractor shall document these cooperative procedures which will
be included in the Incident Handling Guidelines, described in
Task 5 below.

The Contractor shall deliver the Cooperative Procedures Report to
the COTR.

     Task 5 - Develop Guidelines for Incident Handling

The team shall develop guidelines for incident handling that both
the team and technical personnel at the <organization name> sites
can follow.  These guidelines shall include managerial as well as
technical guidance for event handling and the Cooperative
Procedures Report developed in Task 4.  The team shall define
what an incident is and conditions under which the team becomes
involved.  These guidelines shall be consistent with the
<organization name> policy.  These guidelines shall also contain
the necessary details to solve technical problems, conduct
coordinated efforts, and preserve evidence important to follow-up
prosecution.  Finally, these guidelines shall help those involved
in incident handling to categorize events and prioritize
responses to those incidents/events.

The Contractor shall deliver the Incident Handling Guidelines to
the COTR.

     Task 6 - Develop Electronic Communications Capabilities

The team shall establish electronic communications capabilities
with <organization name> sites, so the team can send and receive
electronic mail from numerous sites, send and receive patches and
technical data, etc.  This implies that the team shall have to
establish controls on dissemination of sensitive and privileged
information.  There shall be no open access to any information
the team encounters.

     Task 7 - Identify Software Tools for Incident Handling

The team members shall determine the types of software tools
which can ease the incident handling process.  Tools include
anti-viral programs, intrusion monitoring, detection and
recording capabilities, incident analysis and reverse engineering
tools, and real-time notification.  The Contractor shall write a
report on the tools' capabilities.  This report shall include
recommendations on which tool, if any, would be the most cost-
effective to aid incident handling by <organization name>.

The Contractor shall deliver the report on Software Tools to
Handle Incidents to the COTR.

     Task 8 - Conduct a Training and Awareness Function

The team shall cooperate with the <organization name> to conduct
workshops/training seminars.  These activities shall require the
team to develop demonstrations of viruses and eradication
methods.  The team shall also circulate information about useful
software tools to aid in incident handling.

The COTR will receive the Workshop/Training Seminars Outline and
Schedule.  The Contractor shall coordinate the dates and places
of the Workshops/Training Seminars with the COTR.

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     Automated Tracking System and Clearinghous   <X>  *

     Cooperative Procedures Report                <X>  *

     Incident Handling Guidelines                 <X>  *

     Software Tools to Handle Incidents Report    <X>  *

     Outline of Proposed Workshop/Training
          Seminars                                <X>  *

     Workshop/Training Seminars Outline and
          Schedule                                <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
VII. SPECIAL STUDIES/PRODUCT EVALUATION

     A.   OVERVIEW

Federal security managers find need to evaluate products from a
computer security perspective.  These products may be ADP
products or computer security-related products.  They may be
hardware, software, or firmware.  The products may be ones that
they are currently using or ones that they are considering. 

Organizations are experiencing logistical and technical changes
in their ADP environment.  These changes include the
proliferation of distributed processing, networks, and
microcomputers.  Continuity of organization security controls
throughout the implementation of new products and services must
be assured.  Complete reviews and approval by the organizational
security manager in advance of procurement or development is a
control for ensuring continuity of an organization's security
program. 

Federal security managers need to determine how the products they
are using or considering relate to organizational requirements
for computer security.

There are three specific areas of concern reflected in the SOWs
in this section.  The first area is the impact on computer
security when implementing ADP products on existing organization
systems.  This SOW looks at gauging the impact when introducing
technology such as an OSI-compatible local area network or wide
area network, a new type of mass storage media, a database
management system, or an office automation or electronic mail
package.

The second area measures the impact of a hardware or software
product designed to perform a direct computer security function. 
Examples of this include a virus scanning package, a PC-based
access control package, a mainframe access control system, an
accounting add-on to an operating system, an encryption device,
or a smart card-based identification and authentication system.

The third area examines a product to be used as a computer
security management aid.  A SOW for evaluating a risk management
product serves as illustration.

[NOTE: The term "evaluation" in the SOWs below is not being used
in the same sense as in a formal evaluation performed by the
National Computer Security Center as part of its Trusted Product
Evaluation Program.  NCSC maintains an Evaluated Products List
(EPL) for those products that have been determined to satisfy
specific security criteria (i.e., evaluated against NCSC's
Trusted Computer Systems Evaluations Criteria - the Orange Book). 
Each new piece of software or hardware needs to be tested and
evaluated in the environment in which it will be operating before
being placed in production.  Products on the EPL are usually only
evaluated in a stand-alone environment.  While inclusion of a
product on the EPL is not a substitute for environmentally
testing new hardware and software, understanding the evaluation
process may provide useful information in performing the SOWs
below.  Contact NCSC for further information on the Trusted
Product Evaluation Program.]
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     B.   SECURITY EVALUATION OF AN ADP PRODUCT 

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES

The purpose of this SOW is to evaluate the impact of implementing
and using <product name> by this organization on existing
security controls.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor reviews the organization security plan and
requirements for the product.  The Contractor evaluates <product
name>'s ability to meet the stated application function(s) and
security requirements as well as the computer security impacts of
the package on the computer system.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Organization Security Plan and
               Requirements for an ADP Product

The Contractor shall review the <organization name> security
plan, emphasizing existing controls, and the stated requirements
for the <product name>.  Based on this, the Contractor shall
develop a report on the potential security implications of
installing the needed capability.  The report shall identify
those areas of concern which require more in-depth examination.

The Contractor shall deliver a Security Plan/Requirements Review
Report to the Contracting Officer's Technical Representative
(COTR).

     Task 3 - Evaluate the Product to Determine Security
               Features

The Contractor shall determine the security features of the
<product name> and/or its interfaces with other security products
on the system.  When appropriate, this may require direct contact
with <product name> vendor's representative.  Although purchase
of the product may be necessary, obtaining an evaluation copy on
a trial basis may be preferable.  The Contractor shall also
ensure that the product conforms to relevant existing federal
standards.  The Contractor shall draft a report on the security
features of the product.

The Contractor shall deliver a Product Measurement Report to the
COTR.

     Task 4 - Recommendations and Implementation Plan

The Contractor shall prepare a recommendations report on whether
or not <product name> will meet the organization requirement. 
Recommendations shall be based on cost, response time, ease of
use, ease of implementation and operation, customer support, and
quality of documentation.  If the recommendation is positive, the
Contractor shall prepare a plan for implementing <product name>
supporting the organization security objectives.  The plan should
describe how the objectives are met throughout the implementation
process.

The Contractor shall deliver the Recommendations and
Implementation Plan Report to the COTR.  

[NOTE: Updating the organization security plan is a necessary
activity, however its inclusion in this SOW is optional.]

     Task 5 - Security Plan Update (if necessary)

The Contractor shall draft the update to the <organization name>
computer security plan incorporating the use of <product name>.

The Contractor shall deliver an updated <organization name>
Computer Security Plan to the COTR.   

DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLES                                 DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     Requirements/Security Plan Review Report     <X>  *

     Product Evaluation Report                    <X>  *

     Recommendations and Implementation Plan
          Report                                  <X>  *

     Updated Computer Security Plan               <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]

                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     C.   EVALUATION OF HARDWARE/SOFTWARE PRODUCTS
               THAT PERFORMS A DIRECT COMPUTER SECURITY
               FUNCTION

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to evaluate computer security
products.  The products provide assistance in <computer security
function> for the organization.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor evaluates one or more automated products for
<organization name>, based on organization needs.  The Contractor
then demonstrates the product(s) and recommends the product(s)
for organization use or rejects it as not suitable.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Organization Requirements and Available
               Products

The Contractor shall review the organization's computer security
plan and the requirement for a <type of computer security
product> computer security product.  The review shall document
the capabilities that would be most appropriate to meet
organization needs.  The Contractor shall also assemble a list of
the type of products designed for these needs.  This list shall
include a short general description of each product.

The Contractor shall deliver a Product Requirements Report and
Possible Products List to the COTR.

[NOTE:  If the organization does not have a specific type of
computer security product in mind, the following should be
included:  

When the report is approved, the Contractor shall submit for
approval a list of products to be evaluated in Task 3. The
<organization name> will select <N> products for further
evaluation.]

     Task 3 - Evaluate Available Products

For each product identified in Task 2 as requiring further
evaluation, the Contractor shall obtain a working or
demonstration copy of the product to test its capabilities.  When
appropriate, this may require direct contact with <computer
security product name> vendor's representative.  Although
purchase of the product may be necessary, obtaining an evaluation
copy on a trial basis may be preferable.   The Contractor shall
also ensure that the product conforms to relevant existing
federal standards.

The report shall address the computer security functions
performed by the <computer security product>.  It shall also
address data collection capabilities, utility (e.g., ease of use,
error messages, documentation quality), security controls,
reporting capabilities, product support, and compatibility with
the organization's other computer security products and
procedures.  The Contractor shall prepare a report documenting
advantages and disadvantages of each product.  

The Contractor shall deliver a Product Evaluation Report to the
COTR.

     Task 4 - Demonstration and Recommendations

The Contractor shall conduct a demonstration of each identified
computer security product and emphasize the advantages and
disadvantages in the evaluation report.  The Contractor shall
recommend a product or product(s) and a plan for implementation. 
Recommendations shall be based on the product's ability to meet
specific organization security requirements, as well as cost,
response time, ease of use, ease of implementation and operation,
customer support, quality of documentation, and output reports.

The Contractor shall deliver a Recommendations Report to the
COTR.

[NOTE: While identification of the advantages and disadvantages
of each identified computer security product, is required,
demonstration of each product is optional.]

     Task 5 - Security Plan Update (if necessary)

The Contractor shall draft an update to the <organization name>
computer security plan.  It will include references to the
product's use and the implementation plan.

The Contractor shall deliver a Security Plan Update to the COTR.
DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLE                                  DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  * 

     Product Requirements Report and Possible
          Products List                           <X>  *

     Product Evaluation Report                    <X>  *

     Recommendations Report                       <X>  *

     Security Plan Update                         <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
                    SAMPLE STATEMENT OF WORK

     D.   EVALUATION OF A COMPUTER SECURITY            MANAGEMENT
AID: A RISK MANAGEMENT TOOL

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE

The purpose of this SOW is to evaluate one or more automated risk
management products.  These products provide aid in the risk
management and security planning required for the organization.

ENVIRONMENT

[NOTE: See Appendix H for sample text for environment
considerations.]

REFERENCES 

The Contractor shall perform the tasks described below according
to the following references: [NOTE: See Appendix E for the
applicable references and include specific <organization name>
directives.]

SCOPE OF WORK

The Contractor evaluates one or more automated products for
<organization name>, based on organization needs.  The Contractor
then demonstrates the product and recommends the product for
organization use or rejects it as not suitable.

TASK DESCRIPTIONS

     Task 1 - Work Plan Development

[NOTE: Appendix F contains a sample work plan development task
statement.]

     Task 2 - Review Organization Requirement and Available
               Products

The Contractor shall review the organization's computer security
plan and the requirement for an automated risk management
product.  The review shall document the capabilities that would
meet organization needs.  The Contractor shall also assemble a
list of products designed for these needs.  This list shall
include a short general description of each product.  [NOTE: If
the organization has a specific product in mind, then no list is
required for Task 2.  The product in mind is named at this
point.]

The Contractor shall deliver an Organization Requirements Report
to the COTR.

[NOTE: If the organization does not have a specific product in
mind, the following should be included:  

When the report is approved, <organization name> will select <X>
products for further evaluation.]

     Task 3 - Evaluate Available Automated Products

For each product identified in Task 2, the Contractor shall
obtain a working or demonstration copy of the product and
evaluate its capabilities.  When appropriate, this may require
direct contact with <risk management product> vendor's
representative.  Although purchase of the product may be
necessary, obtaining an evaluation copy on a trial basis may be
preferable.  The Contractor shall prepare a report documenting
advantages and disadvantages of each product.  The report shall
address whether the risk analysis is quantitative, qualitative,
or both.  It shall cover the soundness of the underlying
methodology used by the product.  It shall also address data
collection capabilities, utility (e.g., ease of use, clarity of
error messages, and documentation quality), security controls,
reporting capabilities, product support, and compatibility with
the organization's computer security products and procedures.

The Contractor shall deliver a Product Evaluation Report to the
COTR.

     Task 4 - Demonstration and Recommendations

The Contractor shall conduct demonstrations of each identified
product and emphasize the advantages and disadvantages in the
evaluation report.  The Contractor shall recommend a product(s)
and a plan for implementing the recommended product(s). 
Recommendations shall be based on the product's ability to meet
organization security requirements, as well as soundness of the
underlying methodology, cost, response time, ease of use, ease of
implementation and operation, customer support, quality of
documentation, and output reports. 

The Contractor shall deliver a Recommendations Report to the
COTR.

[NOTE: Updating the organization security plan is a necessary
activity, however its inclusion in this SOW is optional.]

     Task 5 - Security Plan Update (if necessary)

The Contractor shall draft an update to the <organization name>
computer security plan.  It shall include references to the
product's use and the implementation plan.

The Contractor shall deliver a Security Plan Update to the COTR.
DELIVERABLES

[NOTE: See Appendix G for a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In
all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.]

     DELIVERABLE                                  DUE DATE

     Work Plan Development                        <X>  *  

     Organization Requirements Report             <X>  *

     Product Evaluation Report                    <X>  *

     Recommendations Report                       <X>  *

     Security Plan Update                         <X>  *

*  (working days from the beginning of the contract or from the
previous milestone, as determined by the organization)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER

[NOTE: Suggested statements for reporting requirements, technical
contacts, and other are in Appendix B.  Some organizations have
their own guidelines for these sections and the Contracting
Officer should be consulted.]
                                    APPENDICES



APPENDIX                           CONTENT

  A         ANNOTATED REFERENCES
  B         SAMPLE TEXT FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL
            CONTACTS, AND OTHER IN A SOW
  C         ALTERNATE TEXT FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL
            CONTACTS, AND OTHER IN A SOW
  D         SAMPLE JOB DESCRIPTIONS
  E         COMPUTER SECURITY AREA AND SOW-SPECIFIC REFERENCES
  F         SAMPLE WORK PLAN DEVELOPMENT TASK STATEMENTS
  G         SAMPLE TEXT ON SOW TASK DELIVERABLES
  H         SAMPLE TEXT ON ENVIRONMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR SOWs 
  I         SUMMARY TASK LIST OF SOWs
                                   APPENDIX A:
                              ANNOTATED REFERENCES

FEDERAL LAWS

                           BROOKS ACT (Pub. L. 89-306)

This law directed the Administrator of the General Services
Administration (GSA) coordinate and provide for the economic and
efficient purchase, lease, and maintenance of automated data
processing equipment by Federal agencies.  The Brooks Act
authorized the Department of Commerce (DOC) to establish standards,
to conduct research, and to provide scientific and technological
advisory services.  The Act also charged the Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) with fiscal control and the development of
administrative and management policy.  OMB Circular A-130,
Management of Federal Information Resources, implements provisions
of the Brooks Act.  This Act is the primary law controlling the
acquisition of automated data processing (ADP) and
telecommunications resources.

Significant amendments to the Brooks Act were made in the Paperwork
Reauthorization Act and the Computer Security Act of 1987.

                    PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT (Pub. L. 96-511)

This law was enacted to reduce the paperwork burden on the public
and to enhance the economy and efficiency of the government and the
private sector by improving federal information policymaking.  This
law requires each agency designate a senior information resources
management official who is responsible for Brooks Act acquisitions. 
OMB's Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) was
established and made responsible for implementing the Act.  GSA was
designated to advise and assist OMB in triennial reviews of
information management activities of each agency.  This law defined
automated data processing equipment (ADPE) to exclude some types of
data and telecommunications equipment (later referred to as the
"Warner Amendments").

                     WARNER (ASPA) AMENDMENT (Pub. L. 97-86)

This amendment to the Armed Services Procurement Act exempted the
Department of Defense (DoD) from the Brooks Act for certain
applications.  These involve intelligence activities, cryptologic
activities related to national security, command and control of
military forces, equipment integral to a weapon or weapons systems,
or critical to fulfillment of military or intelligence missions.
(See secs. 111(a)(2) and (3) for the Federal Property and
Administrative Services Act for complete definition and
exceptions.)

       FEDERAL MANAGERS' FINANCIAL INTEGRITY ACT OF 1982 (Pub. L.
97-225) 

This law enacted the main provisions of OMB Circular A-123.  Its
purpose is to ensure that agencies maintain effective systems of
accounting and administrative controls against fraud, waste and
abuse.

             PAPERWORK REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 1986 (Pub. L. 99-500)

This law clarified the Brooks Act definition of "ADPE" to include
telecommunications, ADP services and support services.  This law
gave permanent protest jurisdiction to the GSA Board of Contract
Appeals (GSBCA).  Implementation of this law in the Federal
Information Resources Management Regulation (FIRMR) resulted in the
adoption of the term "Federal Information Processing (FIP)
Resources" to encompass all resources defined by the Brooks Act
amendment.

                 COMPETITION IN CONTRACTING ACT (Pub. L. 98-369)

This law emphasized competition in acquisitions, established
exceptions to full and open competition, provided legislative
authority for Government Accounting office (GAO) protest functions,
and authorized GSBCA to resolve ADP protests on a pilot basis. 

                 COMPUTER SECURITY ACT OF 1987 (Pub. L. 100-235)

This law amends the NBS Organic Act of 1901, Federal Property and
Administrative Services Act of 1949 and Brooks Act of 1965 to add
provisions on the protection of computer-related assets (e.g.,
hardware, software, and data).  This Act:

    o   assigns responsibility of development of computer security 
        guidelines and standards to the NIST;
    o   requires federal agencies identify existing and under     
        development systems that contain sensitive information;   
    o   requires development of a security plan for each identified 
        sensitive computer system; and
    o   requires mandatory periodic training in computer security 
        awareness and accepted computer security practice of all  
        employees involved with the management, use, or operation 
        of federal computer systems within or under the supervision 
        of a federal agency.

Current instructions for implementing the Computer Security Act are
provided in OMB Bulletin 90-08, Guidance for the Preparation of the
Security Plans for Federal Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive
Information.  

                      PRIVACY ACT OF 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579)

This law was enacted to provide for the protection of information
related to individuals maintained in federal information systems,
and to grant access to such information by the individual.  The law
establishes criteria for maintaining the confidentiality of
sensitive data and guidelines for determining which data are
covered.

OMB Circular A-130 implements provisions of this act.  FIPS PUB 41
provides computer security guidelines for implementing the act. 

                         COPYRIGHT ACT OF 1980 (17 USC)

This law amends the copyright laws to recognize the realities of
modern data processing systems.  Section 117 permits copying of
copyrighted software for backup or archival purposes if a copy is
required to install the software. 

                         TRADE SECRETS ACT (18 USC 1905)

This law establishes specific penalties for the improper disclosure
of trade secrets entrusted to government agencies.

                       PATENT AND TRADEMARK LAWS (31 USC)

This law applies when an application contains or uses patented
software, users have a responsibility to protect the rights of the
patent holder.  Specifically, the user must ensure that the
patented software is not improperly disclosed, used, or copied.

             ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY ACT (Pub. L. 99-508)

This law provides for the protection of transmissions of various
communications technologies.

                  COUNTERFEIT ACCESS DEVICE AND COMPUTER FRAUD    
             AND ABUSE ACTS (Pub. L. 98-473, Pub. L. 99-474)

These laws established computer related crime as an offense with
specific penalties.

                  PUBLIC PRINTING AND DOCUMENTS ACT (44 USC 33)

This law established procedures for the proper disposal of records.

                  COMPUTER MATCHING AND PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT    
                            (Pub. L. 100-503)

This law established procedures to ensure the accuracy of computer
matching programs.

                   FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (Pub. L. 90-23)

This law makes federal information readily available to the public. 
It also establishes the conditions under which information may be
withheld form the public to ensure that certain information such as
trade secrets be protected.

FEDERAL REGULATIONS

                      FEDERAL ACQUISITION REGULATION (FAR)
                                  (48 CFR 1-51)

The Federal Acquisition Regulation is the primary regulation used
by federal agencies for acquisition of supplies and services with
appropriated funds.

          FEDERAL INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT REGULATION  
                                (FIRMR)                           
                              (41 CFR 101) 

The FIRMR governs the acquisition, management, and use of federal
information processing (FIP) resources (commonly referred to as
ADPE or telecommunication resources).  The FIRMR relies on the
FAR's general policies and procedures and contains policies and
procedures that are in addition to, or take precedence over, the
FAR.  If the FAR and FIRMR conflict, the FIRMR normally prevails.

OPM REGULATIONS

The Office of Personnel Management's (OPM) regulation (5 CFR 930)
requires training for all employees involved in the management and
use of federal computer systems that process sensitive information.

OPM's Federal Personnel Manual (Ch. 731, 732, and 736) establishes
policy on position sensitivity, personnel screening procedures,
adjudication, and security investigations.

OMB CIRCULARS

                               OMB CIRCULAR A-123
                            INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

OMB Circular-123 has specific policies and standards for federal
agencies for establishing and maintaining internal controls in
their programs and administration activities.  This includes
requirements for vulnerability assessments and internal control
reviews.  The main provisions of A-123 became law through the
enactment of the Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act of 1982.

                               OMB CIRCULAR A-127
                          FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
    
OMB Circular A-127 has specific policies and standards for federal
agencies for establishing and maintaining internal controls in
financial management systems.  This includes requirements for
annual reviews of agency financial systems which build on reviews
required by OMB Circular A-123.

                               OMB CIRCULAR A-130
                   MANAGEMENT OF FEDERAL INFORMATION RESOURCES    

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal Automated
Information Systems, has specific requirements for establishing the
agency computer security program.  The program should include
application security, personnel security, information technology
installation security, and security awareness and training
programs.  It also assigns responsibilities to: Department of
Commerce, Department of Defense, General Services Administration,
and Office of Personnel Management.  Federal agencies are required
to address security in their annual internal control report
required under OMB Circular A-123.
CENTRAL AGENCIES

The following organizations have primary authority for overseeing
various aspects of federal information processing resources
acquisition.

                      GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (GSA)

The Brooks Act placed in GSA the authority and responsibility to
acquire ADPE resources.  GSA exercises its authorities by
delegating procurement authority to other agencies through a formal
delegations process.  GSA exercises oversight in various ways,
including periodic review of agencies' acquisition activities. 
These reviews can result in raising or lowing the procurement
authority delegated to an agency.  GSA issues the FIRMR, which
contains regulations unique to FIP acquisitions. and related
bulletins that provide additional guidance.  GSA also publishes a
Federal ADP and Telecommunications Standards Index, available
through the Government Printing Office.

                      OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET (OMB)

The Brooks Act charged OMB with fiscal and policy control for ADP
resources.  OMB has assigned management functions to GSA.

The Paperwork Reduction Act (and reauthorization) granted OMB broad
authority on planning, budgeting, organizing, directing, training,
promoting, controlling, and other managerial activities involving
the collection, use, and dissemination of information.

              NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY (NIST)

NIST, formerly the National Bureau of Standards (NBS), is an agency
of DOC.  The Brooks Act makes NIST responsible for providing
scientific and technological services to agencies for ADP and for
developing and maintaining standards to increase agencies' ability
to share computer programs and data.  The FIPS PUBS are published
by NIST for this purpose.  The Computer Security Act of 1987 amends
several laws to add an acquisition provision, relating to the
protection of computer-related assets (e.g., hardware, software,
and data).  The Act also assigned responsibility for the
development of computer security guidelines and standards to the
NIST.

NATIONAL COMPUTER SECURITY CENTER (NCSC)

The National Security Agency's NCSC: develops and publishes
criteria and guidelines for the development, evaluation, and use of
trusted information processing systems; works with industry to
assist in the development of trusted commercial information
processing products and evaluates the resulting products; works
with NIST in developing a coherent U.S. approach to computer and
information security standards; provides computer security
assistance in cooperative efforts with NIST under the Computer
Security Act, to other government departments and agencies; and
promotes information security and awareness education through
cooperative efforts, public seminars and other forums.
                                   APPENDIX B:
                SAMPLE TEXT FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, TECHNICAL 
                          CONTACTS, AND OTHER IN A SOW

The sample text in this appendix should be included in each SOW in
the  Reporting Requirements, Technical Contact, and Other sections. 
The contents of each section will need to reflect the requirements
of the specific task as well as the standardized requirements
provided by organization contract personnel.  The sample text
provided below is  applicable to most SOWs.  Alternative text and
considerations for revising the contents of these sections are in
Appendix C.  In all cases, consult the Contracting Officer.

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

    Progress Reports

The Contractor shall prepare and submit monthly progress reports.
Progress reports shall be submitted to the <Contracting Officer's
Technical Representative (COTR)> within 5 days after the end of the
month reporting period.  Progress reports shall discuss the status
of all on-going work about specific tasks listed in the SOW.  At a
minimum, each progress report shall contain:

    o   a description of:
        -    work performed during the reporting period just ended; 
        -    work to be performed during the next reporting period; 
        -    any planned travel including travel objectives;      
        -    any problems encountered with corrective action
             proposed or taken and a statement about the potential
             impact of the problem; and
        -    any government action requested;
    o   an estimate of the percent complete for each task; and    
    o   cost reimbursable or time and materials tasks only, the
        hours and funds expended to-date and for the reporting
        period just ended.

    Meeting Minutes

The Contractor shall maintain minutes of meetings during which the
progress of the work is discussed.  The Contractor shall submit the
meeting minutes to the COTR within <N> working days after the
subject meeting.  The meeting minutes shall highlight any decisions
reached, agreements made, or actions to be taken.

    Exception Reports

The Contractor shall prepare and submit an exception report
describing any problems encountered that may impact the government
adversely, require clarification or action by the government,
require documentation, or result in a deviation from the approved
work plan.

TECHNICAL CONTACT

The COTR for this effort is <Name, Address, and Phone Number>.

OTHER

    Contractor Personnel Requirements

Contractor personnel assigned to this effort shall have appropriate
<background screening/security clearance> up to <screening level/-
security clearance level (Secret, Top Secret)>.

The Contractor shall propose staff for assignment to this effort
using the skill categories contained in Appendix D.

[NOTE:  A security clearance level specification should be
consistent with the information sensitivity designation and
required type of background investigation.] 

    Travel

The Contractor <shall/shall not> be required to travel to sites
beyond a 50 mile radius of the location identified by the COTR.

    Government-Furnished Equipment (GFE)/Government-Furnished
Materials (GFM)

No GFE shall be provided.  Documentation relevant to the specified
tasks will be provided or made available as appropriate.
                                   APPENDIX C:
                   ALTERNATE TEXT FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS,     
                 TECHNICAL CONTACTS, AND OTHER IN A SOW 

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

Reporting requirements imposed on a Contractor should be sufficient
to provide adequate information for monitoring task progress
without being burdensome.  Preparing reports is a project cost and
should be realistic to the overall project cost and complexity.

Regular monthly progress reports augmented by exception reports and
meeting minutes are usually enough for most projects.  Where more
frequent reporting is desired, one of the following may be
appropriate:

    o   The Contractor shall prepare and submit brief (not more
        than two pages) weekly progress reports.  The progress
        report shall describe the status of each task identified in
        the SOW and any problems and corrective action proposed or
        taken.  The progress report shall be submitted to the COTR
        on the first work day following the end of the week.
    o   The Contractor shall provide <weekly/biweekly> oral
        progress reports to the COTR.  Oral progress reports may be
        made in person or by telephone.  Oral progress reports
        shall include a discussion of the status of each task
        identified in the SOW, any problems encountered, and
        corrective actions proposed or taken.

    Travel

Many computer systems and applications support or are used by staff
in remote locations.  Site visits are generally required to remote
sites to review security arrangements and evaluate the impact on
overall system/application security of the remote location.  Since
travel to sites can be a significant cost, the following techniques
should be considered instead of visits to each site:

    o   data collection by questionnaire;
    o   site visits to a sample of  sites; and
    o   questionnaires and selected site visits.

If site visits are required, one of the following should be
included in the SOW:

    o   For each site, the Contractor shall conduct an entrance and
        an exit briefing.  Each briefing shall be no more than 1
        hour in duration.  The entrance briefing shall provide site 
        personnel with information describing the objective of the 
        site visit and the work to be performed.  The exit briefing
        shall provide site personnel with information about the   
        work completed at the site.
    o   The Contractor shall coordinate all site visits with the
        Point of Contact (POC) for each site provided by COTR to
        ensure compliance with site-specific security requirements.

    Government-Furnished Equipment (GFE)/Government-Furnished
    Materials (GFM)

In some instances, it is appropriate to provide the Contractor with
government space and equipment.  Instances where such action may be
appropriate include:

    o   long-term efforts where on-site Contractor support will   
        result in lower costs; and
    o   classified or other highly sensitive environments where it 
        may not be practical or efficient to permit duplication or 
        removal of material from the government location.

In some instances, documents may be included in the GFM section. 
This is a partial list of documents the government may provide:

    o   organizational charts;
    o   legislation, regulations, orders, directives, and other   
        publications that affect the organization's operations;   
    o   long and short-range plans;
    o   minutes of meetings of the data processing steering
        committee;
    o   schematic of hardware and network environment;
    o   inventory of hardware and system and application software; 
    o   systems development life cycle methodology;
    o   program change procedures;
    o   data and computer security procedures;
    o   backup and contingency plan documents;
    o   system flowcharts showing the jobs, programs, input, major 
        processing modules, and outputs;
    o   narratives describing the application;
    o   design specifications;
    o   user guides;
    o   operation run instructions including input, processing, and 
        output requirements; error messages and required operator 
        actions; and, restart and recovery instructions;
    o   descriptions or critical files and their data elements;   
    o   prior audit reports (if any); and
    o   previously issued management reports about this 
        application.          
                                    APPENDIX D:
                             SAMPLE JOB DESCRIPTIONS

This section presents suggested skill categories for contractor
staff assigned to support a task(s) defined in a SOW.

    Automated Information Systems (AIS) Security Project Manager

The AIS Security Project Manager (AISSPM) independently performs or
leads one or more project teams in performing risk analysis and
security audit services.  The AISSPM independently develops or
supervises the development of analytical reports and other products 
specified in a SOW.

    AIS Senior Security Analyst

The AIS Senior Security Analyst (AISSSA) leads a team in performing
risk analysis and security audit services.  The AISSSA
independently develops or supervises the development of analytical
reports and other products specified in a SOW.

    AIS Security Analyst

The AIS Security Analyst (AISSA) independently performs risk
analysis and security audit services.  The AISSA develops
analytical reports and other products specified in a SOW.

    AIS Technical Assistant

The AIS Technical Assistant (AISTA) provides help to AIS security
team members in data collection, data analysis, and report
preparation.

    Technical Subject Matter Specialist

The Technical Subject Matter Specialist (TSMS) applies principles,
methods, and knowledge of a particular area of expertise to
specific project task requirements.  The TSMS augments project
teams, in support of the project leader, by providing technical
knowledge and analysis of highly specialized applications and
operational environments.  Technical support may include technical
advice on security requirements for highly specialized AIS
applications, technical report preparation, or other services
specified in a SOW.

    AIS Specialist

The AIS Specialist (AISS) provides specialized aid on problems
requiring in-depth knowledge of a specialized AIS discipline (e.g.,
AIS systems software, database management, office automation, AIS
hardware specialist, and AIS data communications).  The AISS
augments project teams, in support of the project leader, by
providing technical knowledge and analysis of highly specialized
and complex security problems.  Technical support may include
designing controls, implementing secure data communication
networks, preparing technical reports, or other services specified
in a SOW.

    Analyst/Programmer

The Analyst/Programmer (A/P) performs assigned portions of studies. 
The A/P participates in all phases of study development and
production, with emphasis on performing the less complex aspects of
information gathering, analysis, and programming.  The A/P collects
data via manuals, publications, personal interviews, etc. applying
to the activities of data, software, hardware, communications, and
personnel.  The A/P compiles data collected in various compositions
such as checklists, survey formats, various worksheets and reports,
and will then analyze the data.  The A/P applies standard business
and data manipulation principles and methods to technical problems
to arrive at automated solutions.  The A/P is skilled in
programming and canned software packages.  The A/P designs and
prepares technical reports and related documents, and draws charts
and graphs to record results.  The A/P prepares and edits AIS
documentation incorporating information provided by <organization
name>, specialist, analyst, programmer, and operations personnel. 
The A/P also writes, edits, and graphically presents technical
information for technical and non-technical personnel.

    Technical Editor

The Technical Editor (TE) helps to prepare, review, and edit formal
reports to ensure that they are well-written, grammatically
correct, and follow a format specified in a SOW.

    Graphics Specialist

The Graphics Specialist (GS) prepares formal technical security
drawings, graphics, and illustrations (e.g., graphics for facility
security profiles, AIS training aids and materials, presentation
viewgraphs and slides, flow charts, floor plans, and other related
material) specified in a SOW.

    Technical Typist

The Technical Typist (TT) provides clerical and typing support to
the AIS security team members.  The TT types, copies, and binds
formal reports.

    AIS Training Specialist

The AIS Training Specialist (AISTS) works with AIS security content
specialists and managers to design, implement, and evaluate
platform training programs, computer-based training packages, and
interactive video training systems in AIS security awareness and
techniques.                                   APPENDIX E:               
COMPUTER SECURITY AREA AND SOW-SPECIFIC REFERENCES

The following are federal requirements or guidance used as
references for each SOW.  These are the basic references used to
ensure that the tasks conducted, recommendations made, and products
delivered are consistent with government requirements.  These
references are not intended to be all inclusive.  Individual
organization computer security directives should be identified,
added to a SOW, and complied with, where applicable.  For a
description of many of the references listed below, please see
Appendix A.  See note at the end of this section regarding
definition and usage of computer security terms.

The following abbreviations are used:

    o   FIPS PUB - Federal Information Processing Standards       
        Publication
    o   NBS - National Bureau of Standards
    o   NBSIR - National Bureau of Standards Information Report   
    o   NCSC - National Computer Security Center
    o   (N)CSL - (National) Computer Systems Laboratory
    o   NIST - National Institute of Standards and Technology     
    o   NISTIR - National Institute of Standards and Technology   
        Information/Internal Report
    o   NIST SP - NIST Special Publication
    o   OMB - Office of Management and Budget
    o   OPM - Office of Personnel Management
    o   PCMI - Presidents Council on Management Improvement

SECTION II
COMPUTER SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

    DEVELOPMENT OF A COMPUTER SECURITY PROGRAM 
    o   Computer Security Act of 1987, (Pub. L. 100-235) 
    o   Privacy Act of 1974, (Pub. L. 93-579)
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal     
        Automated Information Systems
    o   OPM Federal Personnel Manual Chapter 731 (Personnel       
        Suitability) and Chapter 732 (Personnel Security)
    o   Executive Order 10450, Security Requirements for Government 
        Employment
    o   NIST SP 500-120, Security of Personal Computers Systems: A 
        Management Guide              
    o   NIST SP 500-133, Technical Assessment: Methods for
        Measuring the Level of Computer Security
    o   NBSIR 86-3386, Work Priority Scheme for EDP Audit and     
        Computer Security Review

    PROGRAM ASSESSMENT
    o   FIPS PUB 31, Guidelines for ADP Physical Security and Risk 
        Management
    o   FIPS PUB 87, Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning Risk 
        Management
    o   FIPS PUB 94, Guideline on Electrical Power for ADP
        Installations
    o   FIPS PUB 112, Standard on Password Usage
    o   FIPS PUB 113, Standard on Computer Data Authentication    
    o   OPM Federal Personnel Manual Chapter 731 (Personnel       
        Suitability) and Chapter 732 (Personnel Security)
    o   Executive Order 10450, Security Requirements for Government 
        Employment

SECTION III
APPLICATION SECURITY

    COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY PLAN PREPARATION
        (IAW OMB CIR 90-08)
    o   Computer Security Act of 1987, (Pub. L. 100-235)
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal     
        Automated Information Systems
    o   OMB Bulletin 90-08, Guidance for Preparation of Security  
        Plans for Federal Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive 
        Information 
    o   OPM Federal Personnel Manual Chapter 731 (Personnel       
        Suitability) and Chapter 732 (Personnel Security)
    o   NISTIR 4409, 1989 Computer Security and Privacy Plans
        (CSPP) Review Project: A First-year Federal Response to the
        Computer Security Act of 1987 (Final Report), September
        1990

    CERTIFICATION OF A SENSITIVE SYSTEM
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Paragraph 3.a.(1)(2),   
        Security of Federal Automated Information Systems
    o   FIPS PUB 73, Guidelines for Security of Computer
        Applications
    o   FIPS PUB 88, Guideline on Integrity Assurance and Control
        in Database Administration
    o   FIPS Pup 102, Guidelines for Computer Security
        Certification and Accreditation
    o   NIST SP 500-109, Overview of Computer Security
        Certification and Accreditation
    o   NIST SP 500-133, Technical Assessment: Methods for
        Measuring the Level of Computer Security
    o   Model Framework for Management Control Over Automated     
        Information Systems, January 1988 PCMI
    o   NISTIR 4451, U.S. Department of Commerce: Methodology for 
        Certifying Sensitive Computer Applications

    CONTINGENCY PLANNING
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Paragraph 3.a.(3),
        Security of Federal Automated Information Systems
    o   FIPS PUB 31, Guidelines for ADP Physical Security and Risk 
        Management
    o   FIPS PUB 87, Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning
    o   FIPS PUB 102, Guideline for Computer Security Certification 
        and Accreditation, 
    o   NBS SP 500-85, Executive Guide to ADP Contingency Planning 
        and Disaster Recovery
    o   NBS SP 500-134, Guide for Selecting ADP Backup Processing 
        Alternatives

    SENSITIVE/CRITICAL APPLICATION REVIEW (SCAR)
    o   OMB Circular A-123, Internal Control Systems
    o   OMB Circular A-127, Financial Management Systems
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information     
        Resources
    o   FIPS PUB 73, Guidelines for Security of Computer
        Applications
    o   FIPS PUB 101, Guideline for Lifecycle Validation,
        Verification, and Testing of Computer Software
    o   FIPS PUB 102, Guideline for Computer Security Certification 
        and Accreditation
    o   FIPS PUB 105, Guideline for Software Documentation 
        Management
    o   General Accounting Office (GAO) publications, including:  
        -    Evaluating Internal Controls in Computer-based Systems 
             (GAO Audit Guide)
        -    Review Guide for Federal Agency Accounting Systems   
        -    Audit Guide for Assessing Reliability of Computer
             Output 
        -    Evaluating the Acquisition and Operation of
             Information Systems

SECTION IV
INSTALLATION SECURITY

    RISK ANALYSIS OF A SYSTEM
    o   Computer Security Act of 1987, (Pub. L. 100-235)
    o   Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act of 1982, (Pub. L. 
        97-255)
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Paragraph 3.c.(2),
        Security of Federal Automated Information Systems 
    o   FIPS PUB 65, Guidelines for Automated Data Processing Risk 
        Analysis
    o   NISTIR 4325, U.S. Department of Energy Risk Assessment    
        Methodology, Volumes 1 and 2, May 1990
    o   NIST SP 500-174, Guide for Selecting Automated Risk
        Analysis Tools
    o   Automated Risk Management Software Tools, Irene E. Gilbert 
        and Nickilyn Lynch, Computer Systems Laboratory, NIST, 1991

    DISASTER RECOVERY AND CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS PLANNING
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Paragraph 3.c.(3),
        Security of Federal Automated Information Systems
    o   FIPS PUB 87, Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning
    o   FIPS PUB 102, Guideline for Computer Security Certification 
        and Accreditation 
    o   NBS SP 500-85, Executive Guide to ADP Contingency Planning 
    o   NBS SP 500-134, Guide for Selecting ADP Backup Processing 
        Alternatives

SECTION V
COMPUTER SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING

    COMPUTER SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING
    o   Computer Security Act of 1987, (Pub. L. 100-235)
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Section 3.d Automated   
        Information Systems Security Programs
    o   NIST SP 500-169, Executive Guide to the Protection of     
        Information Resources
    o   NIST SP 500-170, Management Guide to the Protection of    
        Information Resources
    o   NIST SP 500-171, Computer User's Guide to the Protection of 
        Information Resources
    o   NIST SP 500-172, Computer Security Training Guidelines    
    o   OPM Regulation (5 CFR 930)

SECTION VI
COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE

    INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM
    o   Computer Security Act of 1987, (Pub. L. 100-235) 
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal     
        Automated Information Systems
    o   NIST SP 500-166, Computer Viruses and Related Threats: A  
        Management Guide
    o   NIST SP 500-170, Management Guide to the Protection of    
        Information Resources 
    o   NIST SP, Establishing a Computer Security Incident Handling 
        Capability, 1991
    o   Organizing a Corporate Anti-Virus Effort, Alan Fedeli, 1991 
    o   Security Policy Handbook, P. Holbrook and J. Reynolds, 1991 
    o   Responding to Computer Security Incidents: Guidelines for 
        Incident Handling, E.E. Schultz, D.S. Brown, and T.A.     
        Longstaff, 1990

SECTION VII
SPECIAL STUDIES/PRODUCT EVALUATION

    SECURITY EVALUATION OF AN ADP PRODUCT 
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Paragraph 3, Security of 
        Federal Automated Information Systems
    o   OMB Bulletin 90-08, Guidance for Preparation of Security  
        Plans for Federal Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive 
        Information
    o   Model Framework for Management Control Over, Automated    
        Information Systems, January 1988 PCMI

    EVALUATION OF HARDWARE/SOFTWARE PRODUCT THAT PERFORMS A DIRECT 
    COMPUTER SECURITY FUNCTION
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal     
        Automated Information Systems
    o   OMB Bulletin 90-08, Guidance for Preparation of Security  
        Plans for Federal Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive 
        Information
    o   Model Framework for Management Control Over Automated     
        Information Systems, January 1988, PCMI

    EVALUATION OF A COMPUTER SECURITY MANAGEMENT AID: A RISK      
    MANAGEMENT TOOL
    o   OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal     
        Automated Information Systems
    o   OMB Bulletin 90-08, Guidance for Preparation of Security  
        Plans for Federal Computer Systems that Contain Sensitive 
        Information
    o   Model Framework for Management Control Over Automated     
        Information Systems, January 1988, PCMI
    o   NIST SP 500-174, Guide for Selecting Automated Risk
        Analysis Tools
    o   Automated Risk Management Software Tools, Irene E. Gilbert 
        and Nickilyn Lynch, Computer Systems Laboratory, NIST, 1991

NOTE: For definition and usage of computer security terms, there
are several reference sources.  These include NISTIR 4659, Glossary
of Computer Security Terminology, NCSC-TG-004, Glossary of Computer
Security Terms and CSL Bulletin, Bibliography of Computer Security
Glossaries, Sept 1990.
                           Appendix E in Tabular Form
                                   APPENDIX F:
                  SAMPLE WORK PLAN DEVELOPMENT TASK STATEMENTS

The following are examples of work plan development task
statements.  This would normally be the first task of the SOW.  
Each organization should tailor it and the SOW to which it applies.

SAMPLE 1

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development

The Contractor shall conduct an initial survey to verify system
information provided by <organization name> and to collect other
data necessary to perform the work.  Upon completion of the survey,
the Contractor shall develop a work plan and present it to the
Contracting Officer's Technical Representative (COTR).  The work
plan shall include the following:

   o   a statement of the Contractor's approach to the project,   
      including a description of specific procedures, methodology, 
       and techniques employed in performing the <SOW activity>;  
   o   a schedule for site visits, the identification of specific 
       organizations and organization staff to be interviewed and 
       the specific elements of information to be gathered during 
       the visits, and an outline to be used for entrance and exit 
       briefings at each site.

The <organization name> shall review and approve the plan or return
it once for  revision.  Task 2 shall not begin before plan
approval.

SAMPLE 2

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development

The Contractor shall provide the Contracting Officer's Technical
Representative (COTR) with a detailed work plan.  The work plan
will detail the methodology employed and the processes (tasks,
subtasks, etc.) undertaken by the Contractor, the critical path for
each process, the level of effort for each process, and the
timelines, project milestones and delivery dates for performance of
each task identified in the work plan.  In addition, the Contractor
shall prepare and deliver to the COTR a presentation of their
understanding of the work and the approach and processes provided
in the detailed work plan.  The Contractor shall provide slides,
overheads, handouts, and/or other presentation aids.  A copy of the
presentation materials shall be provided to the COTR at the
presentation.
                                   APPENDIX G:
                      SAMPLE TEXT ON SOW TASK DELIVERABLES

The following is a sample text on SOW deliverables.  In all cases,
consult the Contracting Officer.

DELIVERABLES

Most work called for in this SOW involves the submission of
documents, papers, reports, slides, etc. to the COTR.  To avoid
redundancy in the task-specific deliverables that follow, the COTR
stipulates that all deliverables required under this contract be
prepared and presented according to  the following discussion. 
Deliverables contracted for typically require two iterations: 1) a
draft and 2) a final version.  The Contractor will submit drafts to
the COTR for review and comment by the date agreed upon in the
detailed project plan.  The Contractor will submit final versions
to the COTR within <X> days from receipt of written comments.  The
Contractor shall provide the COTR with one hard copy original of
the drafts and one hard copy original and one diskette containing
<organization word processing format> data file for final versions.

All deliverables submitted under this contract shall be accompanied
by a transmittal letter that will identify the contract and the
products presented.  A copy of each transmittal letter will be
forwarded to the Contracting Officer for inclusion in the contract
file.
                                   APPENDIX H:
               SAMPLE TEXT ON ENVIRONMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR SOWs

The purpose of the environment section of the SOW is to provide the
Contractor sufficient understanding of the context in which the
specified tasks are accomplished.  This appendix contains sample
text which might apply.  It may not be necessary to include all the
items covered in this appendix in a particular SOW.  Some
organizations have their own wording or format for this section and
the Contracting Officer should be consulted in all cases.  

Description of the system to include:

    o   an organization and mission statement;
    o   the type and sensitivity of data processed (e.g.,
        financial, personnel, etc.) and how it relates to the daily
        and overall functioning of the organization;
    o   a statement on the significance of the system and the
        impact to the organization if the data is either
        unavailable, accidentally or without authorization
        accessed, or modified;
    o   the geographical location of principal offices,
        headquarters, and offices where the study will be conducted
        or where data or systems to be studied reside; 
    o   any pertinent hostile environment (such as, heat, cold,
        water, etc.) at the geographic locations described above; 
    o   major system components, including hardware (mainframe    
        computer(s), minicomputer(s), microcomputer(s), and local 
        area and wide area network(s)), application and system    
        software, and any supporting network and communications   
        arrangements, whether dedicated or shared, and security   
        packages used;
    o   the number and types of users (local and remote);
    o   the number and complexity of computer programs (including 
        language used), databases, and/or files;
    o   a list of appropriate technical, personnel, administrative, 
        physical, environmental, and telecommunications safeguards; 
    o   statement on the continuity of operation of all information 
        systems that support mission-essential/critical
        organization functions.

This section should also cover the location, source, and contact
for any other information that the Contractor may need to know in
order to perform the tasks in the SOW.  This includes the results
of any previous audits, reviews, studies, certifications, analyses,
etc. that address the computer security of the system(s) for which
the SOW applies.
                                   APPENDIX I:
                            SUMMARY TASK LIST OF SOWs

                                   SECTION II
                      COMPUTER SECURITY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

                   Development of a Computer Security Program

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Current Computer Security Status 
    Task 3 - Develop Framework for the Computer Security Program  
    Task 4 - Develop Details for Computer Security Program
             Details/Strategies
    Subtask 4A - Develop a Personnel Security Strategy 
    Subtask 4B - Develop an End User Computer Security Strategy   
    Subtask 4C - Develop an Application Systems Security Strategy 
    Subtask 4D - Develop an Information Technology Installation   
                 Security Strategy

                               Program Assessment

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Management Procedures and Controls
    Task 3 - Review Physical Security
    Task 4 - Review Data Security
    Task 5 - Review Operating System Security
    Task 6 - Review Application Software Security
    Task 7 - Review Personnel Security
    Task 8 - Review Network Security
    Task 9 - Review Disaster Recovery Plans
    Task 10 - Program Assessment Report

                                   SECTION III
                              APPLICATION SECURITY

                 Computer Security and Privacy Plan Preparation   
                            (IAW OMB CIR 90-08)

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Prepare Plan According to OMB Bulletin 90-08

                       Certification of a Sensitive System

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Determine Security Requirements
    Task 3 - Prepare/Review Statement of Systems Security
             Requirements
    Task 4 - Perform Basic Evaluation of System
    Task 5 - Prepare Control Matrix
    Task 6 - Prepare Security Certification Report
    Task 7 - Prepare Draft Accreditation Decision Statement       
             (Optional)

                              Contingency Planning

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Installation Risk Analysis and Organization   
             Security Plan
    Task 3 - Review Contingency Plans and Critical Processing 
             Scheme
    Task 4 - Review Current Emergency Response Procedures
    Task 5 - Evaluate Damage Assessment Methods
    Task 6 - Review Backup Procedures
    Task 7 - Evaluate Disaster Recovery Plan
    Task 8 - Prepare a Summary Report
    Task 9 - Prepare a Detailed Recommendations Report

                  Sensitive/Critical Application Review (SCAR)

    Task 1 - Prepare a SCAR Work Plan
    Task 2 - Perform Data Collection
    Task 3 - Prepare SCAR Report

                                   SECTION IV
                              INSTALLATION SECURITY

                            Risk Analysis of a System

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Select Methodology for Risk Analysis (Optional)      
    Task 3 - Data Collection
    Subtask 3A - Establish System Boundaries
    Subtask 3B - Value Assets 
    Subtask 3C - Identify Threats 
    Subtask 3D - Identify Weaknesses in Current Safeguards Systems 
    Task 4 - Risk Calculation
    Task 5 - Cost-Benefit Analysis Report (Optional)
    Task 6 - Safeguards Recommendations (Optional)
    Task 7 - Develop a Safeguards Implementation Plan (Optional)

      Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations Planning

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Installation Risk Analysis and <Organization  
             Name> Security Plan
    Task 3 - Review Contingency Plans and Critical Processing 
             Scheme
    Task 4 - Review Backup Procedures
    Task 5 - Review Continuity of Operations/Disaster Recovery Move 
             Plan
    Task 6 - Examine Procedures and Practices for Off-site Storage 
    Task 7 - Disaster Recovery Test Procedures Review
    Task 8 - Evaluate ADP Backup Processing Alternatives
    Task 9 - Prepare a Summary and Recommendations Report

                                    SECTION V
                    COMPUTER SECURITY AWARENESS AND TRAINING

                     Computer Security Awareness and Training

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Develop Course Outline and Master Lesson Plan
    Task 3 - Develop Lesson Plan for Each Audience Category
    Task 4 - Conduct Pilot Class
    Task 5 - Final Course Materials

                                   SECTION VI
                       COMPUTER SECURITY INCIDENT RESPONSE

                             Incident Response Team 

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Establish Incident Response Team
    Task 3 - Establish a Clearinghouse
    Task 4 - Develop Cooperative Procedures
    Task 5 - Develop Guidelines for Incident Handling
    Task 6 - Develop Electronic Communications Capabilities
    Task 7 - Identify Software Tools for Incident Handling
    Task 8 - Conduct a Training and Awareness Function

                                   SECTION VII
                       SPECIAL STUDIES/PRODUCT EVALUATION

                      Security Evaluation of an ADP Product

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Organization Security Plan and Requirement for
             an ADP Product
    Task 3 - Evaluate the Product to Determine Security Features  
    Task 4 - Recommendations and Implementation Plan
    Task 5 - Security Plan Update (if necessary)

             Evaluation of Hardware/Software Products that Performs 
                      a Direct Computer Security Function

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Organization Requirements and Available
             Products
    Task 3 - Evaluate Available Products
    Task 4 - Demonstration and Recommendations
    Task 5 - Security Plan Update (if necessary)
                Evaluation of a Computer Security Management Aid: 
                             A Risk Management Tool

    Task 1 - Work Plan Development
    Task 2 - Review Organization Requirement and Available Products 
    Task 3 - Evaluate Available Automated Products
    Task 4 - Demonstration and Recommendations
    Task 5 - Security Plan Update (if necessary)

