ACQUIRING AND DEPLOYING INTRUSION DETECTION 
SYSTEMS
Intrusion detection is a topic extensively discussed in the popular press, IT trade articles, 
scholarly journals, and security newsletters. Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) hold great 
promise for deterring or mitigating the damage caused by “hacking” or breaking into 
sensitive IT systems. Thus, IDSs are at the forefront of many organizations’ attention and 
now their checkbooks. Careful planning, phased deployments, and specialized training 
are among the steps that can be taken to minimize the potential for costly deployments, 
poor returns on investment, or high maintenance costs while maximizing the security 
benefit to an organization. This ITL Bulletin provides basic information about IDSs to 
help organizations avoid common pitfalls in acquiring, deploying, and maintaining IDSs. 
The topics covered are:
- A definition of intrusion detection,
- Reasons to acquire IDSs,
- Types of IDSs,
- IDS monitoring approaches,
- IDS event analysis approaches,
- IDSs that automatically respond to attacks,
- Tools that complement IDSs,
- Limitations of IDSs,
- Deployment of IDSs, and 
- The future of IDSs.

A Definition of Intrusion Detection
Intrusion detection is the process of detecting unauthorized use of, or attack upon, a 
computer or network. IDSs are software or hardware systems that detect such misuse. 
IDSs can detect attempts to compromise the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
a computer or network. The attacks can come from attackers on the Internet, authorized 
insiders who misuse the privileges given them, and unauthorized insiders who attempt to 
gain unauthorized privileges. 

Reasons to Acquire IDSs 
Intrusion detection capabilities are rapidly becoming necessary additions to every large 
organization’s security infrastructure. The question for security professionals should not 
be whether to use intrusion detection, but which features and capabilities to use. 
However, one must still justify the purchase of an IDS. There are at least three good 
reasons to justify the acquisition of IDSs: to detect attacks and other security violations 
that cannot be prevented, to prevent attackers from probing a network, and to document 
the intrusion threat to an organization.

Detecting attacks that cannot be prevented
Attackers, using well-known techniques, can penetrate many networks. This often 
happens when known vulnerabilities in the network cannot be fixed. For instance, in 
many legacy systems, the operating systems cannot be updated. In updateable systems, 
administrators may not have or take the time to install all the necessary patches in a large 
number of hosts. In addition, it is usually not possible to perfectly map an organization's 
computer use policy to its access control mechanisms and thus authorized users often can 
perform unauthorized actions. Users may also demand network services and protocols 
that are known to be flawed and subject to attack. Although, ideally, we would fix all 
vulnerabilities, this is seldom possible. Therefore, an excellent approach for protecting a 
network may be to use an IDS to detect when an attacker has penetrated a system using 
an uncorrectable flaw. It is better at least to know that a system has been penetrated so 
that administrators can perform damage control and recovery than not to know that the 
system has been penetrated.

Preventing attackers from probing a network
A computer or network without an IDS may allow attackers to leisurely and without 
retribution explore its weaknesses. If a single, known vulnerability exists in such a 
network, a determined attacker will eventually find and exploit it. The same network with 
an IDS installed is a much more formidable challenge to an attacker. Although the 
attacker may continue to probe the network for weaknesses, the IDS should detect these 
attempts, may block these attempts, and can alert security personnel who can take 
appropriate action. 

Documenting the threat
It is important to verify that a network is under attack or likely to be attacked to justify 
spending money for securing the network. Furthermore, it is important to understand the 
frequency and characteristics of attacks in order to understand what security measures are 
appropriate for the network. IDSs can itemize, characterize, and verify the threat from 
both outside and inside attacks, thereby providing a sound foundation for computer 
security expenditures. Using IDSs in this manner is important, since many people 
mistakenly believe that no one (outsiders or insiders) would be interested in breaking into 
their networks.

Types of IDSs
There are several types of IDSs available today, characterized by different monitoring 
and analysis approaches. Each has distinct uses, advantages, and disadvantages. IDSs can 
monitor events at three different levels: network, host, and application. IDSs can analyze 
these events using two techniques: signature detection and anomaly detection. Some IDSs 
also have the ability to automatically respond to the detected attacks. These variations are 
discussed in the following sections.

IDS Monitoring Approaches
One way to delineate IDSs is to look at what they monitor. Some IDSs listen on network 
backbones and analyze network packets to find attackers. Other IDSs reside on the hosts 
that they are defending and monitor the operating system for signs of intrusion. Still 
others monitor individual applications. 

Network-Based IDSs
Network-based IDSs, currently the most common type of commercial product offering, 
detect attacks by capturing and analyzing network packets. Listening on a network 
backbone, a single network-based IDS can monitor a large amount of information. 
Network-based IDSs usually consist of a set of single-purpose hosts that “sniff” or 
capture network traffic in various parts of a network and report attacks to a single 
management console. Since no other applications run on the hosts used by a network-
based IDS, they can be secured against attack. Many of them even have “stealth” modes, 
which make it extremely difficult for an attacker to detect their presence and locate them. 

Advantages:
- A few well-placed network-based IDSs can monitor a large network.
- The deployment of network-based IDSs has little impact upon an existing network. The 
network-based IDSs are usually passive devices that listen on a network wire without 
interfering with the normal operation of a network. Thus, it is usually easy to retrofit a 
network to include network-based IDSs with a minimal installation effort.
- Network-based IDSs can be made very secure against attack and even made invisible to 
many attackers.

Disadvantages:
- Network-based IDSs may have difficulty processing all packets in a large or busy 
network and, therefore, may fail to recognize an attack launched during periods of high 
traffic. Some vendors are attempting to solve this problem by implementing IDSs 
completely in hardware, which is much faster. The need to analyze packets quickly also 
forces vendors to try and detect attacks with as little computing resources as possible, 
which may reduce detection effectiveness. 
- Many of the advantages of network-based IDSs do not always apply to more modern 
switch-based networks. Switches can subdivide networks into many small segments 
(usually one fast Ethernet wire per host) and can provide dedicated links between hosts 
serviced by the same switch. Most switches do not provide universal monitoring ports 
and this reduces the monitoring range of a network-based IDS sensor to a single host. In 
switches that do provide such monitoring ports, often the single port cannot mirror all 
traffic traversing the switch.
- Network-based IDSs cannot analyze encrypted information. This increasingly will 
become a problem as use of encryption becomes more popular both by organizations and 
by attackers. 
- Most network-based IDSs do not report whether or not an attack was successful, they 
only report that an attack was initiated. After a detected attack, administrators must 
manually investigate each attacked host to determine whether or not the hosts were 
penetrated.

Host-Based IDSs
Host-based IDSs operate by analyzing the activity on a particular computer. As such, 
they must collect information from the host they are monitoring. This allows an IDS to 
analyze activities on the host at a very fine granularity and to determine exactly which 
processes and users are performing malicious activities on the operating system. Some 
host-based IDSs simplify the management of a set of hosts by having management 
functions and attack reports centralized at a single security console. Others generate 
messages that are compatible with network management systems.

Advantages:
- Host-based IDSs can detect attacks that are not detectable by a network-based IDS since 
they have a view of events local to a host. 
- Host-based IDSs can operate in a network that is using encryption when the encrypted 
information is decrypted on, or before reaching, the monitored host.
- Host-based IDSs can operate in switched networks.

Disadvantages:
- The collection mechanisms must usually be installed and maintained on every host to be 
monitored.
- Since portions of these systems reside on the host being attacked, host-based IDSs may 
be attacked and disabled by a clever attacker.
- Host-based IDSs are not well suited for detecting network scans of all hosts in a 
network since the IDS at each host only sees the network packets that the host receives. 
- Host-based IDSs often have difficulty detecting and operating in the face of denial-of-
service attacks.
- Host-based IDSs use the computing resources of the hosts they are monitoring.

Application-Based IDSs
Application-based IDSs monitor the events transpiring within an application. Often 
application-based IDSs detect attacks by analyzing the application’s log files. By 
interfacing with an application directly and having significant domain or application 
knowledge, application-based IDSs are more likely to have a more discerning or fine-
grained view of suspicious activity in the application. 

Advantages:
- Application-based IDSs can monitor activity at a very fine granularity, which often 
allows them to track unauthorized activity to individual users.
- Application-based IDSs can often work in encrypted environments, since they interface 
with the application that may be performing encryption.

Disadvantages:
- Application-based IDSs may be more vulnerable than host-based IDSs to being attacked 
and disabled since they run as an application on the host they are monitoring.

The distinction between an application-based IDS and a host-based IDS is not always 
clear, so for the remainder of this bulletin, we will refer to both as host-based IDSs. 

IDS Event Analysis Approaches
There are two primary approaches to analyzing events to detect attacks: signature 
detection and anomaly detection. Signature detection is the primary technique used by 
most commercial systems; however, anomaly detection is the subject of much research 
and is used in a limited form by a number of IDSs. 

Signature-Based IDSs
Signature-based detection looks for activity that matches a predefined set of events that 
uniquely describe a known attack. Signature-based IDSs thus must be specifically 
programmed to detect each known attack. This technique is extremely effective and is the 
primary method used in commercial products for detecting attacks.

Advantages:
- Signature-based IDSs are very effective at detecting attacks without generating an 
overwhelming number of false alarms.

Disadvantages:
- Signature-based IDSs must be programmed to detect each attack and thus must be 
constantly updated with signatures of new attacks.
- Many signature-based IDSs have narrowly defined signatures that prevent them from 
detecting variants of common attacks.

Anomaly-Based IDSs
Anomaly-based IDSs find attacks by identifying unusual behavior (anomalies) on a host 
or network. They function on the observation that some attackers behave differently than 
“normal” users and thus can be detected by systems that identify these differences. 
Anomaly-based IDSs establish a baseline of normal behavior by profiling particular users 
or network connections and then statistically measure when monitored activity deviates 
from the norm. Unfortunately, these IDSs often produce a large number of false alarms, 
since normal user and network behavior can vary wildly. Despite this weakness, 
researchers assert that anomaly-based IDSs are able to detect never-before-seen attacks, 
unlike signature-based IDSs that rely on analysis of past attacks. Although some 
commercial IDSs include restricted forms of anomaly detection, few, if any, rely solely 
on this technology.  However, anomaly detection remains an active intrusion detection 
research area. 

Advantages:
- Anomaly-based IDSs detect unusual behavior and thus have the ability to detect attacks 
without having to be specifically programmed to detect them.

Disadvantages:
- Anomaly detection approaches usually produce a large number of false alarms due to 
the unpredictable nature of users and networks. 
- Anomaly detection approaches often require extensive “training sets” of system event 
records in order to characterize normal behavior patterns.

IDSs that Automatically Respond to Attacks
Since human administrators are not always available when an attack occurs, some IDSs 
can be configured to automatically respond to attacks. The simplest form of automated 
response is active notification. Upon detection of an attack, an IDS may e-mail or page an 
administrator. A more active response is to stop an attack in progress and then block 
future accesses by the attacker. Typically, IDSs do not have the ability to block a 
particular person, but instead block Internet Protocol (IP) addresses from which an 
attacker is operating. It is very difficult to automatically stop a determined and 
knowledgeable attacker, but IDSs often can deter expert attackers or stop novice hackers 
by using the following capabilities: 
- Cutting TCP connections by injecting reset packets into the attacker’s connections to 
the target of the attack,
- Reconfiguring routers and firewalls to block packets from the attacker’s location (IP 
address or site), 
- Reconfiguring routers and firewalls to block the protocols being used by an attacker, 
and
- In extreme situations, reconfiguring routers and firewalls to sever all connections using 
particular network interfaces.

A more aggressive way to respond to an attacker is to launch attacks against or attempt to 
actively gain information about the attacker’s host or site.  However, this response can be 
extremely dangerous for an organization since it may be illegal and cause damage to 
innocent Internet users. It is even more dangerous to allow IDSs to automatically launch 
these attacks, but limited automated “strike-back” strategies are sometimes used for 
critical systems. Obtain legal advice before pursuing any of these options.   

Tools that Complement IDSs
Several tools exist that complement IDSs and are often labeled as IDSs by vendors since 
they perform similar functions. This section discusses these tools and how they can 
enhance an organization’s intrusion detection capability.

Honey Pot and Padded Cell Systems
Several novel additions to the intrusion detection product line recently hit the market and 
it is important to understand how these products differ from traditional IDSs. Honey pots 
are decoy systems that attempt to lure an attacker away from critical systems. These 
systems are filled with information that is seemingly valuable but which has actually 
been fabricated and which would not be accessed by an honest user. Thus, when access to 
the honey pot is detected, there is a high likelihood that it is an attacker. Monitors and 
event loggers on the honey pot detect these unauthorized accesses and collect information 
about an attacker’s activities. The purpose of the honey pot is to divert an attacker from 
accessing critical systems, collect information about the attacker’s activity, and 
encourage the attacker to stay on the system long enough for administrators to respond.

Padded cells take a different approach. Instead of trying to attract attackers with tempting 
data, a padded cell waits for a traditional IDS to detect an attacker. The attacker is then 
seamlessly transferred to a special padded cell host. The attacker may not realize 
anything has happened, but the attacker is now in a simulated environment where no 
harm can be caused. Like the honey pot, this simulated environment can be filled with 
interesting data to convince an attacker that the attack is going according to plan. Padded 
cells offer unique opportunities to monitor the actions of an attacker. IDS researchers 
have used padded cell and honey pot systems since the late 1980s, but until recently no 
commercial products have been available.

Advantages:
- Attackers can be diverted to system targets that they cannot damage.
- Administrators can be given time to decide how to respond to an attacker.
- Attackers’ actions can be more easily monitored, with results used to improve system 
protections. 
- Honey pots may be effective at catching insiders who are snooping around a network.

Disadvantages:
- Honey pots and padded cells have not yet been shown to be widely useful security 
technologies.
- An expert attacker, once diverted into a decoy system, may become angry and launch a 
more hostile attack against an organization’s systems.
- A high level of expertise is needed for administrators and security managers in order to 
use these systems.
- The legal implications of using such devices are not well defined.

Vulnerability Assessment Tools
Vulnerability assessment tools determine when a network or host is vulnerable to known 
attacks. Since this activity is related to actually detecting attacks, these tools are 
sometimes referred to as intrusion detection tools. They come in two varieties: passive 
and active. Passive vulnerability assessment tools scan the host on which they reside for 
insecure configurations, software versions known to contain exploitable flaws, and weak 
passwords. Active assessment tools reside on a single host and scan a network looking 
for vulnerable hosts. The tool sends a variety of network packets at target hosts, and from 
the responses, the tool can determine the server and operating system software on each 
host. In addition, it can identify specific versions of software and determine the presence 
or absence of security-related patches. The active assessment tool compares this 
information with a library of software version numbers known to be insecure and 
determines if the hosts are vulnerable to known attacks. 

Limitations of IDSs 
Current intrusion detection products have limitations that one must be aware of before 
undertaking an IDS deployment.  
- Despite vendor claims, most IDSs do not scale well as enterprise-wide solutions.  The 
problems include the lack of sufficient integration with other security tools and 
sophisticated network management systems, the inability of IDSs to assess and visualize 
enterprise-level threats, and the inability of organizations to investigate the large number 
of alarms generated by hundreds or thousands of IDS sensors.
- Many IDSs create a large number of false positives that waste administrators' time and 
may even initiate damaging automated responses.
- While almost all IDSs are marketed as “real time” systems, during heavy network or 
host activity, an IDS may take several minutes before reporting and automatically 
responding to an attack.
- IDSs usually cannot detect newly published attacks or variants of existing attacks. This 
can be a serious problem as 30-40 new computer attacks are posted on the Web every 
month. An attacker may simply wait for a new attack to be posted and then quickly 
penetrate a target network.
- IDSs’ automated responses are often ineffective against sophisticated attackers. They 
usually stop novice hackers but, improperly configured, can hurt a network by 
interrupting legitimate network traffic. 
- IDSs must be monitored by skilled computer security personnel in order to achieve 
maximum benefits and to understand the significance of what the IDS detects.
- IDS maintenance and monitoring can use a substantial amount of personnel resources.
- Many IDSs are not failsafe; that is, they are not well protected from attack or 
subversion. 
- Many IDSs do not have user interfaces that allow users to spot cooperative or 
coordinated attacks.
- IDSs cannot be used in isolation, but must be part of a framework of computer security 
measures. For a list of such measures, see the May 1999 ITL Bulletin entitled “Computer 
Attacks: What They Are and How to Defend Against Them.” (See below.)

Deployment of IDSs 
Intrusion detection technology is a necessary addition to every large organization’s 
computer security framework. However, given the weaknesses found in some of today’s 
products, and the relatively limited security skill level of most system administrators, 
careful planning, preparation, prototyping, testing, and specialized training are critical 
steps for an effective IDS deployment.

NIST suggests performing a thorough requirements analysis, carefully selecting the 
intrusion detection strategy and solution that is compatible with the organization’s 
network infrastructure, policies, and resource level. Organizations should consider a 
staged deployment of IDSs to gain experience and to ascertain how many monitoring and 
maintenance resources they will require. There is a large variance in the resource 
requirements for each type of IDS.  IDSs require significant preparation and ongoing 
human interaction.  Organizations must have appropriate security policies, plans, and 
procedures in place so that personnel will know how to react to the many and varied 
alarms IDSs will produce. 

We recommend consideration of a combination of network-based IDSs and host-based 
IDSs to protect an enterprise-wide network. First deploy network-based IDSs since they 
are usually the simplest to install and maintain; then follow up by defending critical 
servers with host-based IDSs. Honey pots should be used judiciously and only by 
organizations with a highly skilled technical staff that are willing to experiment with 
leading-edge technology. Padded cells are currently unavailable except as research 
prototypes. 

Deploying Network-Based IDSs
There are many options for placing a network-based IDS and different advantages for 
each location:
Location:	Behind each external firewall
Advantage: 	Sees attacks that are penetrating the network’s perimeter defenses from the 
outside world. 
Location:	In front of an external firewall
Advantage:	Proves that attacks from the Internet are regularly launched against the 
network.
Location:	On major network backbones
Advantage:	Detects unauthorized activity by those within a network and monitors a 
large amount of a network’s traffic.
Location: 	On critical subnets
Advantage:	Detects attacks on critical resources.

Deploying Host-Based IDSs
Once an organization has deployed network-based IDSs, host-based IDSs can offer an 
additional level of protection. However, it can be time-consuming to install host-based 
IDSs on every host in an enterprise. Therefore, it is often preferable to begin by installing 
host-based IDSs only on critical servers. This placement will decrease the overall 
deployment costs and allow limited personnel to focus on alarms generated from the most 
important hosts. Once the operation and maintenance of host-based IDSs is routine, more 
security-conscious organizations may consider installing host-based IDSs on the majority 
of their hosts. In this case, purchase host-based systems that have an easy-to-use 
centralized management and reporting function since the management of alerts from a 
large set of hosts can be daunting.

The Future of IDSs 
The IDS research field has been active since around 1985, but the wide-scale commercial 
use of IDSs did not start until about 1996. In 1998, sales of IDS tools reached $100 
million. By all estimates, the market for IDS tools should continue to grow strongly. 
From this history, it is apparent that while the IDS research field is maturing, commercial 
IDSs are still in their formative years.  Some commercial IDSs have received negative 
publicity due to their large number of false positives, overwhelming numbers of attack 
reports, lack of scalability, and lack of integration with enterprise management systems. 
However, given that commercial IDSs are still evolving rapidly, we believe that these 
issues will be addressed quickly. The development of IDS products is likely to parallel 
that of anti-virus software. Early anti-virus software created false alarms on many normal 
user actions and did not catch all known viruses. However, over time, anti-virus software 
progressed to its current state, in which few users notice that it is running and they have 
confidence that it detects all known viruses.  

For More Information
Acquiring, deploying, and maintaining an IDS is a complex task. Fortunately, many 
excellent resources in the form of books and seminars exist to guide the public on IDS 
technology. Several free IDS resources are available:

For an overview of IDSs and their capabilities, read the white paper “An Introduction to 
Intrusion Detection Assessment for System and Network Security Management” at 
http://www.icsa.net/services/consortia/intrusion/intrusion.pdf. 

For a survey of commercially available IDSs that allows one to easily compare features, 
read the “Intrusion Detection System Product Survey” published by the Los Alamos 
National Laboratory and found at http://lib-www.lanl.gov/la-pubs/00416750.pdf.  

Information on the computer attacks that IDSs detect can be found in the May 1999 ITL 
Bulletin entitled “Computer Attacks: What They Are and How to Defend Against Them,” 
available at http://www.nist.gov/itl/lab/bulletns/cslbull1.htm.

NOTE:  Any mention of commercial products is for information only; it does not imply 
recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
nor does it imply that the products mentioned are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose.
