                      Computer Systems Laboratory Bulletin
                                  March, 1992


AN INTRODUCTION TO SECURE TELEPHONE TERMINALS

This bulletin addresses several frequently asked questions about
secure telephone terminals, discusses practical security issues
from a federal user's viewpoint, and provides sources for
additional information.  A secure telephone terminal is a device
that connects to a telephone line or a cellular telephone system
and provides a variety of security services to the conversation
or information being transmitted.

Secure telephone terminals are becoming more widely available for
the protection of both classified and unclassified voice, data,
and facsimile (fax) communications (most modern secure telephones
have a data port for connecting to computers or fax machines). 
The secure terminals range in capability from protecting
conversations between the handset and the base terminal in
cordless telephones to protecting national security classified
information in fixed and mobile telecommunications.

BACKGROUND

Federal Roles and Responsibilities
Each federal agency is responsible for the security of its own
information processing and telecommunications.  In accordance
with the Computer Security Act of 1987, each agency is
responsible for identifying the unclassified, but sensitive,
information to be protected and for selecting the equipment or
procedures to be used in providing the protection.  In accordance
with applicable National Security Directives (NSDs) such as NSD
42, agencies are also responsible for protecting classified
information using National Security Agency (NSA)-approved
information security systems.

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is
responsible for developing standards for, and providing
assistance to, agencies in protecting their unclassified
information.  NSA is responsible for providing the security
necessary to protect classified information and "Warner
Amendment" sensitive information. 

Additional information on the roles of NIST and NSA in the
computer security area is contained in the CSL Bulletin of
February 1991.  Other agencies, such as the General Services
Administration, the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration, and the National Communications Agency, also
provide specific services and guidance in utilizing secure
telecommunications.

Technology Overview
Most current telephone terminals and transmission facilities are
based on and use analog electromechanical and electronic
technology.  This technology models the human speech
communication system which produces (in the voice box), receives
(through the ears), and processes (in the brain) continuous
waveforms of speech.  Early forms of secure voice communication
simply scrambled the voice signals to produce unintelligible
noise which was then transmitted.  The descrambling equipment
would convert the noise back to recognizable speech.

Modern telephone terminals and transmission facilities use
digital technology which utilizes a sequence of the binary digits
0 and 1 to represent computer data, human speech, or fax
pictures.  Existing analog telecommunications systems can
transmit digitized voice, data, and pictures using a special
device called a modem.  

Modems provide transmission rates generally up to 9600 bits per
second.  Thousands of bits per second can be communicated with
moderate technology digital communications systems and millions
of bits per second can be communicated with high technology
systems.  Voice, data, and pictures can be mixed on the same
transmission medium (e.g., optical fiber) and separated for
presentation to the intended recipient.  This is the basis of the
modern Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN).  Improved
security can be provided to these communications by simply
permuting or encoding the bits that represent the speech, data,
and pictorial images. 

Current Status of Secure Telephone Terminals
Commercial "cordless" telephones are presently available which
protect conversations between a handset and its base station. 
Unprotected cordless telephones have a usual range of
approximately 100 feet and conversations can sometimes be picked
up by an identical base station located in a neighbor's house. 
These "protected" telephones typically use a simple coding
system, with a number of user-selected codes, to prevent someone
from passively listening to a conversation.  These telephones
also protect against someone making a long-distance telephone
call from a handset outside a residence to avoid the long-
distance charges.  These telephones provide protection against
what is considered a low level of threat.

Commercial cellular telephones are vulnerable to scanning devices
that are designed to monitor telephone conversations within a
local "cell."  Some cellular services are beginning to offer
protection to local subscribers for their communications between
a cellular terminal and the nearest cellular switching office. 
However, they do not protect the communications to a remote
telephone or cellular terminal.  These secure cellular telephones
provide protection against local threats.

During the early 1980s, NSA sponsored a development program which
resulted in the Secure Telephone Unit (STU) III terminal.  The
STU-III looks like a typical telephone but provides end-to-end
security between any two STU-III devices, even those manufactured
by different vendors.  Three U.S. vendors are authorized to make
the devices:  AT&T, General Electric, and Motorola.  The STU-III
utilizes current analog telephone communications but secures the
speech signals by digital security techniques.  There are also
cellular STU-III terminals which provide "end-to-end" security
between any two cellular STU-III terminals or between a cellular
mobile terminal and a fixed terminal.  The STU-III terminals
provide protection against what is considered a high level of
threat.

GOVERNMENT POLICY AND REGULATIONS

Government policy exists on the protection of classified
communications; classified information (voice/data/fax) must be
encrypted for transmission using cryptographic algorithms
implemented in devices endorsed by NSA.  Cryptographic key used
for these applications is provided via NSA-approved Communication
Security (COMSEC) methods.  

There is no specific government policy that directs agencies to
encrypt all unclassified sensitive communications.  Circular A-
130, issued by the Office of Management and Budget, directs
agencies to assure that an appropriate level of security is
maintained in all information technology installations and to
conduct periodic risk analyses to assure that appropriate cost-
effective safeguards are used.  NIST develops the technical
standards that can be used for this protection.  An agency
determines when such protection is needed.

Types of Cryptographic Algorithms and Security Devices
Four types of cryptographic algorithms and security devices are
defined in the National Information Security (INFOSEC) glossary
[NSTISSI No. 3019].  Type 1 cryptographic devices are endorsed by
NSA and contain classified algorithms approved by NSA for
securing classified information.  Type 2 cryptographic devices
are endorsed by NSA and contain classified algorithms approved by
NSA for protecting Department of Defense unclassified information
covered by the Warner Amendment (10 USC 2315).  Type 3
cryptographic algorithms are NIST standards to be used for
protecting all unclassified, sensitive, non-Warner Amendment
government information or commercial information.  Type 4
cryptographic algorithms are commercial algorithms that are not
NIST standards.  NIST plans to establish a Computer Security
Objects Register (CSOR) to include information about these
algorithms.

In order to facilitate interoperability among diverse user
communities, security devices may contain more than one type of
algorithm.  For instance, a Type 1 STU-III terminal also contains
a Type 2 algorithm.  A Type 2 STU-III terminal contains the same
Type 2 algorithm but also implements the Data Encryption Standard
(DES).  A Motorola Type 3 (i.e., DES) secure telephone terminal
is not a STU-III but does interoperate with the Motorola Type 2
STU-III when using the DES algorithm.  The other STU-III vendors
(i.e., AT&T and General Electric) are also developing Type 2
STU-III devices that contain the DES for protecting sensitive or
valuable non-Warner Amendment information.

Security for Voice/Data/Fax
Modern telecommunications applications integrate voice, data, and
pictures in a single digital communication system.  Modern
cryptographic algorithms and security devices can protect all of
these integrated applications.  Users can often utilize one
device for all applications.

Security may include different protection services, depending on
the application and device.  All secure telephone terminals
protect information from unauthorized disclosure to varying
degrees.  Most provide some type of authentication of the
terminals and access control for the person or computer using the
terminal.  Most provide communications integrity (i.e.,
protection of the transmitted information from unauthorized
modification or replacement).  Users should specify the type and
level of protection desired when procuring a secure telephone
terminal.

EXPORT OF SECURE TELEPHONE TERMINALS

All security devices that encrypt information are subject to U.S.
export control.  Devices that encrypt voice/data/fax must have an
export license issued by the U.S. Department of State before they
can be legally shipped or taken out of the country.  Software
systems that encrypt voice/data/fax are subject to the same
restrictions.  Thus users of secure telephone terminals within
the U.S. must be aware of export restrictions if they wish to
communicate securely with someone overseas.  

STU-III devices may be used outside the U.S. and Canada only with
NSA permission.  Type 4 security devices may be exportable if
they contain only cryptographic algorithms approved for export;
these are designated as Type 4(E) devices.  Some Type 3 secure
telephones also contain a Type 4(E) algorithm for international
communication with a compatible Type 4(E) device.  At present,
there are no Type 3(E) (i.e., exportable DES protected) secure
telephones in existence.

SECURE TELEPHONE TERMINAL STANDARDS

The NSA STU-III development program demonstrated the need for
tightly controlled standards in order to assure interoperability
among STU-III devices of different vendors.  The STU-III program
not only specified the algorithms and protocols to implement but
also provided conformance and interoperability tests for the
STU-III terminals.  

NIST has issued two standards related to data encryption. 
Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 46-1 defines the
Data Encryption Standard (DES) algorithm.  FIPS 81 specifies four
modes of operation for the DES.  In addition, FIPS 140-1,
expected to be issued in 1992, will specify physical and logical
security requirements for a cryptographic module.  These
standards are applicable to Type 3 secure telephone terminals. 
NIST does not issue standards for Type 4 devices.

Security
Security is provided in STU-III devices via NSA-specified
algorithms and key management systems.  Type 3 devices use the
DES for encrypting information but presently use proprietary
techniques for generating or distributing the needed DES keys. 
Type 4(E) secure telephone terminals use proprietary techniques
for both.  

Interoperability
NSA specifies how interoperability is achieved in STU-III
terminals when using the Type 1 and Type 2 modes.  Motorola
specifies how interoperability is achieved between their Type 3
secure telephone and their Type 2 STU-III telephone when both are
using the DES mode.  Motorola also achieves interoperability
between the same Type 3 secure telephone and their Type 4(E)
secure telephone.  They provide a proprietary key management
system for their commercial secure terminals using public-key
technology.  The other STU-III vendors use proprietary techniques
for key management for the Type 3 mode of operation.

At the present time, Type 3 terminals from one vendor do not
interoperate with Type 3 terminals from other vendors. 
Commercial users should be aware of this when procuring such
terminals.  Government users of Type 2 STU-III terminals cannot
interoperate with Type 3 terminals procured from a different
vendor.  Type 4 or 4(E) terminals of different manufacturers also
typically do not interoperate.  Procurement documents should
specify the interoperability required.

ADDITIONAL SECURITY REQUIREMENTS

Users should be aware of additional security requirements when
using secure telephone terminals.  Type 1 STU-III requirements
are specified in the Operational Security Doctrine (NSTISSI No.
3013).  Type 2 STU-III requirements are specified in an Interim
Operational Security Doctrine (Draft NSTISSI).  Users of Type 3
and Type 4 secure terminals should be aware of and follow similar
security requirements and practices.

A secure terminal must be provided adequate physical security to
protect it and its physical environment from unauthorized use,
acquisition, access, modification, or installation of monitoring
devices.  A physical and logical access control system must be
supported.  Terminal and user identification systems are required
and must be administratively supported for authorized users. 
Terminals capable of operating in unattended data communication
modes must have adequate internal access control mechanisms to
prevent unauthorized outgoing or incoming transmissions. 
Adequate cryptographic key control is required.  Since the entire
security of the terminal is based on protecting the cryptographic
key from unauthorized disclosure, replacement, or use, such
protection must be continuously provided.  Keys should be
destroyed when no longer useful.
 
SUPPORT INFRASTRUCTURE

Similar to the communications services infrastructure that is
available nationally and internationally to support telephone
communications, a security services infrastructure must be
available to support communications among secure telephones.  NSA
provides these services for authorized users of STU-III
terminals.  Users of Type 3 or Type 4 security devices should be
aware that key management and trusted maintenance must be
provided to maintain secure operation.

Sales
With the exception of Canada, sales of STU-III terminals (Type 1
and Type 2) are limited to the U.S. government and their
contractors.  Type 1 STU-III terminals may be purchased for the
protection of U.S. government classified information.  Type 2
STU-III terminals may be purchased to protect all U.S. government
sensitive unclassified information:  Type 2 mode for Warner
Amendment information and Type 3 mode for all other sensitive
unclassified information.  Type 3 Secure Telephone Terminals may
also be procured by the U.S. government if they contain and are
built to applicable Federal Information Processing Standards. 
These terminals should also be used in accordance with applicable
NIST standards.

Type 3 secure terminals may be purchased within the U.S. for the
protection of commercial information and for interoperability
with compatible Type 2 STU-III terminals.  Type 4(E) terminals
may be purchased anywhere for use in commercial applications
overseas and for interoperability with secure terminals within
the U.S. that support a compatible Type 4(E) algorithm.

Type 1 STU-III terminals may not be resold and Type 2 STU-III
terminals can be resold only to those approved by NSA.  Type 3
secure terminals may be sold and resold anywhere in the U.S. 
Type 4(E) secure terminals may be sold anywhere.

Commercial products are being manufactured which provide a wide
range of security.  Users should be aware of the benefits and
limitations of commercial security products.  Federal users
should procure and use only appropriate government-approved
security devices for protecting federal classified or
unclassified, but sensitive, information.

REFERENCES

Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100-235.

Federal Information Processing Standard 46-1, Data Encryption    
Standard (DES).

Federal Information Processing Standard 81, DES Modes of     
Operation.

Draft Federal Information Processing Standard 140-1, Security
Requirements for Cryptographic Modules.

National Security Directive 42 (Issued by the National Security
Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Committee).

National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems
Security Instruction (NSTISSI) No. 3013, Operational Security
Doctrine for the Type 1 STU-III Terminal.

Draft NSTISSI, Interim Operational Security Doctrine for the Type
2 STU-III Terminal.

Office of Management and Budget Circular A-130, Management of
Federal Information Resources.
  
POINTS OF CONTACT

STU-III Users Support:  (800) 328-7883 (Outside MD)
                        (301) 684-7073 (Inside MD)

NIST Computer Security Division:  (301) 975-2934


