








                       ASSESSING FEDERAL AND COMMERCIAL
                           INFORMATION SECURITY NEEDS







                                  NISTIR 4976
                                 November 1992













David F. Ferraiolo
Dennis M. Gilbert
Nickilyn Lynch



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Technology Administration
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Computer Security Division
Computer Systems Laboratory
Gaithersburg, MD  20899









                            ABSTRACT


In a  cooperative effort with government and industry,  the National
Institute  of  Standards and Technology  (NIST) conducted a study to
assess  the  current and future information technology (IT) security
needs of the commercial, civil, and military sectors.

The primary objectives of the study were to:

     o    determine  a basic set of  information protection policies
          and  control   objectives   that  pertain  to  the  secure
          processing needs of organizations within all sectors; and


     o    identify  protection requirements and technical approaches
          that  are   used,   desired  or  sought  so  they  can  be
          considered for future federal standards and guidelines.

The findings  of this  study  address the basic security needs of IT
product   users,   including    system   developers,    end   users,
administrators,   and   evaluators.   Security   needs   have   been
identified based on  actual  existing and  well-understood  security
organizational practices.





























                                        i




                               EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The   federal  government  and  private  industry  rely  heavily  on
information   processing    systems   to   meet   their   individual
operational,  financial,  and  information technology  requirements.
Corruption, unauthorized  disclosure, or theft of resources have the
potential  to disrupt  operations  and could have financial,  legal,
human safety, personal privacy, and public confidence impact.

Each   organization    interviewed    exhibited    unique   security
characteristics described  in terms  of the  organization's missions
and goals.  Security  needs  were further  characterized from system
to system within an organization.

System  and  organizational  security requirements  were found to be
based  on a  higher  set  of  environmental  and policy factors  and
conditions.  Computer  security  technology  is applied uniquely  in
each situation even though there are common concerns.

Because  each   organization  has  unique  security needs,  security
products  have   been  applied  on a  case  by case  basis  to  meet
individual   security  threats  and  concerns.  Products  should  be
flexible enough to  serve  a broad spectrum of security needs at the
operating  system  level,  the application level, the organizational
level,  and the  site  level.  Organizational  security requirements
also  change over time  and  cannot be totally specified at the time
of product acquisition.

For organizations  that process  unclassified sensitive information,
the  availability of a greater  variety  of trusted products that go
beyond  C2  in terms of  functionality  and  flexibility  is needed.
There is a demand  to address data  integrity  in a  more direct and
user friendly manner.  Vendors should  consider new  mechanisms that
directly address discretionary and non-discretionary  controls, such
as role-based access controls,  separation of duties,  separation of
transactions, and user-oriented least privilege.

Most  organizations  felt  security standards  should include a wide
range  of  assurances  including a  "generally  accepted  commercial
practice"  level.  This  new  level  should  minimize  the  cost  of
developing new systems  or retro-fitting new security  functionality
in existing systems.

Nearly  all of those  interviewed  expressed the  desire to  have an
independent third party  give a  "stamp of approval"  with regard to
the trustworthiness of  the systems they were buying.  However,  the
current evaluation and certification process  (i.e., with respect to
a TCSEC class)  was not perceived  by users  as  meeting their needs
for a variety of reasons.

Those interviewed  felt that  security  standards  have not  emerged


                                       ii




that  will  allow   integrating   security  across   a  multi-vendor
environment.  A  system   should  provide  a  single  user  view  of
security  services  across  a  wide   range  of  operating  systems.
Security features should inter-operate  with other security services
on both local  and remote machines,  without the need to train users
in new  security products.  Security technology  must support  users
working effectively  together,  sharing  information,  resources and
network  applications  from  whatever  desktop  device  they  choose
within their authority,  while providing  a common set  of  security
services.

This  study  has  attempted  to  identify  basic  security  needs of
information technology  product users,  administrators,  developers,
and evaluators  based on actual organizational  practices.  Although
the findings of this study  should not be considered conclusive,  it
is hoped that they will be considered  in the development  of future
protection  requirements,   standards,   guidelines  and  evaluation
programs.



































                                      iii



                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                              PAGE

ABSTRACT             . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ii

LIST OF APPENDICES   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v

1   INTRODUCTION

    1.1  Development of Security Technology . . . . . . . . . .1-1
    1.2  Notions of Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1-2
    1.3  Conventions Used in this Document . . . . . . . . . . 1-2
    1.4  Document Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-2

2   PROJECT APPROACH

    2.1  Overview    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
    2.2  Profile of the Organizations  . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
    2.3  Topics Covered  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-2

3   FINDINGS

    3.1  Basis for Protection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
         3.1.1  Driving Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
         3.1.2  Types of Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-3
    3.2  Sector Protection Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . 3-3
         3.2.1  Common Notions of Protection . . . . . . . . . 3-3
         3.2.2  Distinguishing Protection Characteristics  . . 3-5
    3.3  Organizational Security Approach  . . . . . . . . . . 3-6
         3.3.1  Identification and Authentication  . . . . . . 3-6
         3.3.2  Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-7
              3.3.2.1  Discretionary Access Control  . . . . . 3-7
              3.3.2.2  Role-Based Controls . . . . . . . . . . 3-8
              3.3.2.3  Separation of Transactions  . . . . . . 3-9
              3.3.2.4  Separation of Related Duties . . . . . 3-10
              3.3.2.5  Principle of Least Privilege . . . . . 3-10
              3.3.2.6  Label-Based Mandatory Access
                         Controls   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-11
              3.3.2.7  Object-Label Association . . . . . . . 3-12
         3.3.3  User Accountability . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-12
    3.4  Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)  . . . . . . . . . 3-13
    3.5  Assurance and Quality  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-13
    3.6  Evaluation         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-14
    3.7  Current Criteria Not Keeping Pace  . . . . . . . . . 3-15
    3.8  Need for Security in Open Systems  . . . . . . . . . 3-16
    3.9  Owner-Custodian Relations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-16
    3.10 Security Policies and Environments Can 
              Change Over Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-17


                                       iv



                                                              PAGE

4   CONCLUSIONS

    4.1  Minimum Security Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
         4.1.1  Baseline Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
    4.2  Computer Security Features Enabled by Default . . . . 4-2
    4.3  Assurance   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
    4.4  Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
    4.5  Administration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
         4.5.1  Password Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
         4.5.2  EDI Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
    4.6  Add-On Packages   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
    4.7  Current Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-4
    4.8  Security Standards for Multi-Vendor Systems . . . . . 4-4
    4.9  Closing Thoughts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-5



LIST OF APPENDICES

APPENDIX A:  LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS . . . . . . . . .  APPENDIX A-1

APPENDIX B:  SAMPLING OF JOB TITLES  . . . . . . . .  APPENDIX B-1

APPENDIX C:  SAMPLE QUESTIONS  . . . . . . . . . . .  APPENDIX C-1

APPENDIX D:  RELATED NIST ACTIVITIES AND SOURCES
              OF INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . .  APPENDIX D-1
























                                        V



1.   INTRODUCTION

In  a  cooperative  effort  with government  and industry,  the  National
Institute of Standards and Technology  (NIST) conducted a study to assess
the current  and future  security needs  of the  commercial,  civil,  and
military sectors.

The primary objectives of the study were to:

     o     determine a basic set of information protection policies,  and
           control objectives that pertain to the secure processing needs
           within all sectors; and

     o     identify protection requirements and technical approaches that
           are  used,  desired or  sought  so they can be  considered for
           future federal standards and guidelines.

The  findings  of  this  study   address  the  basic  security  needs  of
information technology  (IT)  product users.   This includes  application
developers,   end   users,  and   administrators.   As   such,   security
requirements  can  be  identified  based  on  actual  existing  and  well
understood security organizational practices.

The NIST study team  used a set of topics  as guidance  when meeting with
the  various  organizations.  The topics  are  discussed  in  Section  2.
Appendix C contains  a sample of  the  questions  asked  and  the  issues
explored during the interviews.

1.1  Development of Security Technology

The U.S. government  has been involved  in developing security technology
for computer and communications security for some time.

Although advances  have been  great,  it is generally perceived  that the
current set of security technology has, to some extent, failed to address
the needs  of all.  This is especially true of organizations  outside the
Department of Defense (DoD).

The  current  set  of security  criteria,  criteria  interpretation,  and
guidelines  has grown out of research  and development efforts of the DoD
over  a period  of  twenty plus years.  There  exists  one U.S.  computer
security  standard,  the  Trusted  Computer  System  Evaluation  Criteria
(TCSEC).  It  consists of security features  and assurances,  exclusively
based  on DoD  security policy.  The TCSEC  concentrates particularly  on
those  policies  created  to  prevent   the  unauthorized  disclosure  of
classified information.  The result  is a collection of security products
built  to TCSEC  requirements  that do  not  fully  address  unclassified
sensitive  security  issues.  This study  indicates that  these  security
products can be useful in providing computer security in non-DoD sectors,
but they provide  a partial solution  at best  and are used  in lieu of a
more appropriate set of controls.


                                     1 - 1



Until recently,  the government has paid  little comparable attention  to
researching  and addressing  IT  security  needs  of the  government  and
commercial sectors  that do not  process classified  information.  During
the past few years, however, managers and security officers of commercial
and  government  organizations  have  paid  increasing  attention  to  IT
security needs.

To help address  these protection issues,  NIST  publishes standards  and
guidelines for the unclassified community.  The Computer Security Act  of
1987  (Public Law 100-235) assigned NIST the responsibility of developing
security standards and guidelines for sensitive  (non-classified) federal
computer  systems.  The  law  gave  NIST  responsibility  for  developing
validation  procedures   for  cost-effective  security   and  privacy  of
sensitive information  in federal  computer  systems.  The law  also gave
NIST  the authority  to perform research,  conduct  studies,  and  devise
techniques appropriate  to a computer system's security  and privacy.  To
gain a better  understanding  of the  needs  of  our  constituents,  NIST
conducted this study.


1.2  Notions of Trust

As commercial  and civil sectors  have become  increasingly dependent  on
complex  and interconnected computer systems,  trust in these systems has
become  an   increasing  concern.   Examples  of  trust  issues  include:
maintaining  the  privacy  of  employees,  ensuring  the correctness  and
accuracy of medical  and credit records,  and protecting national secrets
from unauthorized disclosure or modification.  The term "trusted systems"
refers to systems supporting substantially increased safety, reliability,
and, in particular, security mechanisms.  "Security" refers to protection
against unwanted disclosure, modification, or destruction of data.

To be effective,  however, security must also address safeguarding system
security  features  themselves.  Security,  safety,  and reliability  are
elements  of  system  "trustworthiness" - a  level  of confidence  that a
system will do what it is expected to do.


1.3  Conventions Used in this Document

"Federal government" refers to all government agencies, military and non-
military.  The  "civil sector"  refers to the civil  "federal government"
(and in some  instances  "state government").  DoD and military  are used
interchangeably,  unless otherwise stated,  and cover both classified and
sensitive (non-classified) activities.


1.4  Document Overview

The sections following this introduction detail the study project.

Section 2, Project Approach,  gives an overview of the project, discusses

                                      1 – 2



the project approach,  profiles the organizations  that were interviewed,
and reviews the topics covered in the interview.

Sections 3,  Findings,  presents the study findings  in terms of required
protection policies,  security, feature needs,  security assurance needs,
and product and application assessment.

Section 4, Conclusions, contains the study conclusions.

Appendices A - D present information  not covered in the main body of the
paper,  including sample  questions,  study participants,  and additional
resources.









































                                      1 – 3



2.   PROJECT APPROACH

2.1  Overview

The NIST study team  conducted in-person discussions  with key persons in
28 commercial  and civil  organizations  between  March  and  June  1991.
Organizations were represented by  1 to 12 people.  The participants came
from a  wide variety of  perspectives,  environments,  applications,  and
system  architectures.  They  included  users   and  systems  management,
systems  operations,  computer   security,   and  information   resources
management personnel.  The study  especially sought  to reach people with
major organizational mission responsibilities, who must react to breaches
in information accuracy, availability, or privacy.

An  invitational workshop  was held  at  the  beginning  of the  project.
Numerous  discussions  at  the  workshop   provided  valuable  input  and
direction.  Participation in the study was strictly voluntary.  The study
was not part of any audit or  Computer Security Act security  and privacy
plans review effort.

In order to encourage candor and to respect individual and organizational
privacy,  details are not attributed to individuals  or organizations  in
this report without permission.  NIST sent copies  of the report to study
participants for comment.


2.2  Profile of the Organizations

The NIST study team  met with 28 organizations  - 17 federal agencies, 10
commercial  organizations,  and  1  state  government.  Fourteen  of  the
organizations  were in the Washington/Baltimore area  and 14 were outside
of this area,  and included Arizona,  California,  New Jersey,  New York,
Pennsylvania,  and  Texas.  Companies   representing  energy,  financial,
communications,  insurance,  manufacturing,  computers,  and service were
included.  Of the federal organizations,  both the executive and judicial
branches were represented.  Activities included law enforcement, benefits
delivery,  nuclear/energy,   space  exploration,   defense,  tax  system,
information collection and dissemination, air traffic, and service center
operations.  Contractors  participated in a number  of the federal agency
meetings.  State functions represented included justice,  transportation,
lottery, franchise tax,  health and welfare,  motor vehicles, controllers
office, and data center operations.

Appendix A  provides a detailed list of the organizations.  A sampling of
job titles  of the approximately 120 people  interviewed  can be found in
Appendix B.







                                      2 - 1



2.3  Topics Covered

The following topics were addressed at each meeting:

     o     Key,  significant information  protection requirements - those
           elements  that were  the  driving  force  in establishing  the
           protection requirements,  e.g. legal  or regulatory,  business
           practices, organization policy regarding customer and employee
           privacy, fear of litigation, etc.

     o     Organizational information processing environment - in general
           terms,  such things  as  centralization  vs.  distribution  of
           resources, management and administration, and issues regarding
           networking, connectivity, interoperability, and homogeneity.

     o     Organizational  information   protection   objectives   -  the
           concerns    regarding    system   trustworthiness    including
           confidentiality,    integrity,   availability,   safety,   and
           reliability.

     o     Important  information  protection  features and  assurances -
           what  type   of  computer  security  products,  features,  and
           mechanisms  were used,  desired,  or  sought?   This  included
           discussion   of  the   organization's   baseline   protections
           including design,  development,  and operational controls  for
           providing confidence that the security features exist and work
           as intended.

     o     Needed confidence level  in protection mechanisms - the degree
           of confidence  in the  protection mechanisms  required by  the
           organization.

     o     Methods to achieve confidence - what methods the  organization
           uses,  would like  to use,  or have available  to achieve  the
           desired confidence.

     o     Addressing evolving protection requirements  of the 1990s -how
           the organization sees  its situation  and environment changing
           over the next few years  and how that  impacts its  protection
           requirements.

Each  organization  was also  invited to make  additional comments or ask
additional questions.  Because of the free-form "discovery" nature of the
meetings  not all of the topics  were covered in the same level of detail
at every meeting.

The  questions  used at each meeting  are in Appendix C.   They served as
background  as well as guidance  to the team during the meetings with the
organizations.  The questions  represent the types of information sought,
but were not necessarily asked during the sessions.



                                      2 – 2



3.   FINDINGS

Each organization interviewed  exhibited unique security characteristics.
Security was often described  in terms of the organization's missions and
goals.  Security objectives  were also different  from system  to  system
within an organization.  For example, the requirements (security features
and  types  of assurance)  for the financial  and  administrative  system
within a hospital  were drastically different from those for the computer
resources  devoted  to the  clinical treatment  of patients  within  that
hospital.

System and organizational security requirements are based on a higher set
of environmental  and policy factors  and conditions.  These factors  and
conditions are referred to in this document as "basis for protection" and
discussed below.

At the  system level,  representatives from each  organization  generally
described  their security requirements  in terms of the following control
objectives:

     o     identification and authentication,
     o     access control, and
     o     user accountability.

The emphasis and specifics of each area were largely different.  This was
particularly true for the control objective access control.  The TCSEC C2
class was often cited  as a practical baseline for referencing applicable
requirements.  While C2 does provide many baseline requirements, it falls
short  in both  security features,  (e.g., password complexity,  resource
access control, and system access control) and assurances.

In addition,  the need for a variety  of access controls  was noted.  The
TCSEC  label-based mandatory policy  was commonly viewed as inappropriate
for the protection of commercial and civil sector data.

Specifics  of  these  computer  security  approaches   are  described  in
Subsection 3.3, Organizational Security Approach.


3.1  Basis for Protection

Significant  and  broadly sweeping  security requirements  were found  to
exist within  all organizations.  Such requirements  included  protecting
the integrity, availability, and confidentiality of key software systems,
databases, and data networks.

3.1.1      Driving Requirements

Both federal government  and corporations  were found  to rely heavily on
information  processing  systems  to meet  their individual  operational,
financial,  and information  technology  requirements.   The  corruption,
unauthorized  disclosure,  or theft of resources could disrupt operations

                                      3 – 1



and  have immediate  serious  financial,  legal,  human safety,  personal
privacy and public confidence impacts.   Computers must also be protectedagainst 
misuse by an individual  committing such acts as data interchange
fraud, harassment or personal terrorism, and pornography.

Organizations  processing  and  storing  classified  information focus on
preventing  unauthorized observation/disclosure  of data as the basis for
protection.   For  these   organizations,   the  unauthorized   flow   of
information from a high level to a low level was the principal concern.

For the federal government, requirements exist for protecting the privacy
of personal information.  These requirements come from the Privacy Act of
1974.  The Act provides privacy safeguards  by requiring federal agencies
to protect the personal information  it collects,  maintains,  uses,  and
disseminates.   Additionally, when an agency contracts for services,  the
contractor   must   protect  the   information   subject  to  the   Act's
requirements.

Protecting  the privacy  of personal  information  was  also relevant  to
commercial sector organizations.  The need to protect sensitive data from
unauthorized  access  resulted from  operational  environment  (including
threats)  and data  sensitivity  factors.   These factors  include  legal
obligations  and self-imposed requirements  including  confidentiality of
salary,  performance,  and  health  (mental,  drug,  and alcohol  related
illness), as well as data involving legal incidents.

Privacy issues  were perceived  as  particularly critical  in medical and
insurance applications.   Educational, employment and personnel,  banking
and   financial  institutions,   and  credit  bureaus  also  acknowledged
protecting the privacy of individuals  as a high organizational priority.

The need to preserve customer,  insurer,  and stockholder confidence  was
also cited  as a basic security objective  for many  organizations.   The
vice president  of a major bank  described  the need  to  "provide a good
service at a reasonable cost"  as an important capability of most savings
and  financial institutions  but described  the need  for  "maintaining a
general sense of customer confidence" as critical.

The  basis  for  protection   takes  on  a  specific  meaning  for  those
organizations,  such as banks, credit companies, and insurance companies,
concerned with preventing unauthorized distribution  of financial assets.
These businesses  are subject to  federal regulatory requirements  of the
Federal  Trade Commission  and the Federal  Reserve Board  under the Fair
Credit Billing Act,  Equal Credit Opportunity Act,  and  Truth-in-Lending
Act.

Security issues  can also be unique  to a specific industry.   Of all the
organizations interviewed,  only PACBELL and BELLCORE were concerned with
preventing  unauthorized use  of long-distance telephone circuits.   Only
hospitals  and  those who develop  hospital systems  were concerned  with
preventing unauthorized distribution of prescription drugs.


                                      3 – 2



Professional standards,  health and safety,  prevention  of embezzlement,
good business practices, and profit were also stated as key factors in an
organization's basis for protection.

3.1.2      Types of Information

In general,  the interviews focused on the protection of information that
a user may entrust to a system.  During the course of the interviews, two
other types of information were noted as requiring protection.  These two
types were:

     o     system-operating information (software, tables, etc.); and

     o     system-generated  information  (user  activity  data,  general
           traffic data, audit information, etc.).

Each  type  of information  was found  to have  its own  security  policy
requirements.   In the case of system-operating information  and  system-
generated information,  the system itself  was perceived as the owner and
primary custodian of the information.  The system owner/operator sets the
policy  requirements  for protecting information.   The owner  of system-
generated  information  is the system owner/administrator,  who also sets
its policy.


3.2  Sector Protection Requirements

Some  similarities   and  differences  of   security  needs   within  the
commercial, civil, and military sectors were noted.   Security objectives
were specified and governed by many independent levels of authority, from
general legislation,  to organizational rules of operation, to rights and
needs  of the individual.   Standards of due care  were different in each
environment,  just  as  controlling  laws  differ  in  each state.   Each
organization  had  its  own  objectives  and  rules  for computer  access
privileges.   The U.S.  DoD confidentiality policy was unique in applying
a single set of security services across a large number of applications.

3.2.1      Common Notions of Protection

"Conventional wisdom"  holds  that the military  is  concerned  only with
protecting  the confidentiality of classified information.   Similarly, a
policy  of  integrity  and  reliability   is  associated  primarily  with
commercial and civil sectors.   The study team found those view points to
be over-simplified.

Integrity issues  are critical  to the commercial  and civil sectors,  as
well as the military sector.  For example,  integrity takes on a critical
meaning within a military Nuclear Command and Control (NC2) system.   The
NC2 system may disseminate  a critical message from a top command tier of
a tactical network  down to a  field terminal  associated  with a weapon.
This dissemination  must occur  in a timely  and unaltered  manner.   The
knowledge  of the contents  of such a message  during a  nuclear exchange

                                      3 - 3



would have little or no value to an adversary.   However,  the ability of
an adversary  to alter the contents of,  or to deny or delay the delivery
of, such a message could alter the course of a war.

The study team found that a computerized hospital support system, whether
in  a  VA  or  commercial  hospital,  also  imposes  stringent  integrity
controls.   The integrity controls  of such a system must provide for the
ethics  and laws  associated  with the  clinical treatment  of  patients.
Prior diagnoses  can never be destroyed  or  altered;  only  doctors  can
perform a diagnosis  and prescribe medicine.   Protecting the accuracy of
patients medical records  may be critical  if there is  an accident where
the patent becomes unconscious.  The correctness of information including
the patient's reaction to medications, pre-existing ailments, blood type,
or medication  currently  being prescribed  can all prove  to be  health-
threatening or even life-threatening.

Integrity issues,  in general,  were found  to address  a richer and more
dynamic facet  of security  than  confidentiality.   These  issues  often
pertained  not only to who can access  what data (which is common to most
confidentiality access control models)  but also how and when the data is
accessed.  The more commonly agreed upon objectives of integrity include:

     o     Ensuring the consistency  of  data values  within  a  computer
           system;

     o     Recovering  to  a  known  consistent  state  in the event of a
           system failure;

     o     Ensuring  that data  is  modified  only  in  authorized  ways,
           whether by users or by the system;

     o     Maintaining  consistency  between information  internal to the
           computer system and the realities of the outside world.

Integrity issues were particularly relevant to applications such as funds
transfer, clinical medicine, environmental research, air traffic control,
and avionics,  as well as many classified  and sensitive (non-classified)
DoD applications.  For some systems, integrity was closely related to the
issue of system safety.   Two examples are maintaining the safe operation
of a manned space vehicle  and a doctor relying on the correct results of
a medical diagnostic machine.

While  usually associated  with the military sector,  the commercial  and
civil sectors  are also concerned with  protecting the confidentiality of
their information.   Examples include  the protection  of personnel data,
marketing plans, product announcements,  formulas,  and manufacturing and
development techniques.

Commercial and civil sector  organizations  are obligated  to protect the
results  of  mandatory  medical  exams  and  substance  abuse tests  from
unauthorized disclosure.   The compromise  of a preliminary  agricultural
report could provide an unfair advantage within the futures market.   The

                                      3 – 4



knowledge of the thresholds used by IRS computers to flag tax returns for
subsequent audits could have great financial benefits.

3.2.2      Distinguishing Protection Characteristics

Although a common core  of high-level security needs  have been found  to
exist  across   all  sectors,   some  basic   differences  exist.   These
differences are in the way  information is handled and where the emphasis
is placed on security within the commercial, civil, and military sectors.

The military emphasizes strong access controls  placed between  users and
classified  information.   These controls  must  be  highly resistant  to
bypass  and alteration.   To  achieve this  and other  requirements,  the
operating  environment   is  designed   around   a   requisite   security
architecture.

Because  of  the  potential  consequences,   organizations  that  process
classified information are willing to go through greater expense than the
rest of  the federal government  in terms of dollars,  system development
time,  and computer performance, to mitigate risk.  Where add-on security
products  are not  available,  the military  has designed  and  developed
secure systems  from the  ground up  to meet  its security  needs.   Such
expenses are normally not justified in the commercial and civil sectors.

On the other hand,  the commercial  and civil sectors  have traditionally
emphasized auditing techniques,  along with basic access control methods.
This was based on (1) the belief that a user who knows he or she is being
watched  is less likely  to violate  security  and  (2) the average  user
knowing little  about computers.   In contrast,  the military  has always
placed less emphasis on auditing  since it is concerned with threats from
malicious software,  such as Trojan Horses  and trap doors,  that  can be
designed  to bypass  ordinary auditing  mechanisms.   However,  since the
average person is more knowledgeable  and comfortable with computers, the
threat to commercial systems has increased.  Consequently, the difference
between the security threats  to commercial computer systems and those of
the military is becoming less extreme.

The study team found that most commercial organizations  take a carefully
measured  and  cost-effective  approach  to computer  and  communications
security issues.   Each  commercial  organization  interviewed  described
computer  security  as an important  and necessary  capability  of  their
computer systems.  However,  such statements were  quickly caveated  with
the reality  that a business case  is also presented regarding the merits
of such capabilities.  This business case was described as balancing the:

o    cost to implement, maintain, and administer security;

o    benefits gained by imposing security; and

o    impact on the user.

The costs  associated  with security  are absorbed  as part  of overhead,

                                      3 – 5



resulting in reduced profits and a potential loss of competitiveness.  On
the  other hand,  by neglecting security,  an organization  becomes  more
vulnerable to attack.  An attack could result in an unexpected and direct
cost  to the company  through a loss of confidence in the organization by
its customers, or legal actions.  These factors can affect profits.

Another consideration  is how security effects the user.   The goal is to
make  security features  as transparent  as possible  to the user.   If a
user's  ability  to  utilize  the  system  is  impeded  due  to  security
constraints,  then the organization  is that  much  less  efficient.   An
organization risks  becoming less competitive due to higher overhead cost
or absorbing the added operational cost through lower profits.

A great deal  of  importance  is  placed  on  being  in-step  with  other
organizations of like size  and function  in terms of a security program.
This provides confidence that the organization is staying within the norm
of generally accepted business practices,  thereby reducing risk in terms
of incurred liability.  Such considerations,  along with more traditional
risk analysis,  are used  as the basis  for determining requirements  and
implementing safeguards.  Within the commercial sector, there is a trade-
off  between  the cost  associated  with  potential  loss  and  the  cost
associated with implementing security mechanisms.

Computer security programs of the federal government, in general, look at
different cost factors than those of the commercial sector.  The concerns
in  federal  government,  like  the  commercial  sector,  are  budgetary,
"regulatory,"  and  reputation.   The  difference  is  that  the  federal
government is not profit-oriented,  nor does it worry about market share.
Of more concern  is maintaining  public confidence,  complying  with  new
regulations,  and keeping  a good reputation  with  the public.   A major
security incident can impact all three factors.


3.3  Organizational Security Approach

The NIST study team discussed with each organization the type of computer
security products,  features, and mechanisms that were used,  desired, or
sought.   This  included   the  organization's   approach   to  providing
confidence that the security features exist and work as intended.   These
include  design,  development,  and operational  control  aspects.  These
approaches  will only  consider information  technology and  not  discuss
other safeguards, such as physical and procedural controls.

3.3.1  Identification and Authentication

Identification and authentication  were critical to every system the NIST
study  team  reviewed.   The most common  method  of  authentication  was
passwords.  Passwords can also be required at the data file level.

Passwords  are considered  by  many  to be  a  relatively  weak  security
mechanism.   Users tend  to use  easily guess  passwords  (e.g., spouse's
name,  birth date,  sport team, etc.).   A randomly generated password is

                                      3 – 6



difficult to remember, causing the user to write it down and creating the
possibility  of  loss   or  disclosure.   Other  vulnerabilities  include
spoofing users,  users stealing passwords  through observing key strokes,
and  users  sharing  passwords.   The unauthorized  use  of passwords  by
hackers or insiders is a primary concern.

Those interviewed  felt that NIST  should encourage vendors  to provide a
strong password management capability  at the operating system level that
would be tailorable to specific environmental needs.

Along with  the availability of a strong  password management capability,
they  felt NIST  should continue  to promote  research  on improving  the
integrity of the identification and authentication process.  Technologies
such  as smart cards,  signature verification,  and voice  authentication
were mentioned  as having  a potential place  in an overall  approach  to
security.   However, for organizations with large numbers of users,  only
a low-cost solution would be practical.

3.3.2      Access Control

The  access  control  needs  and  control  policies of each  organization
interviewed   varied.     Many   of   these   policies   consider   site,
organizational, industry, or agency-unique factors.

Access control policies are context-dependent; it is not possible to know
the environment  in which such control  will be applied.   Not all stated
access control policies  can be easily mapped  and implemented  using the
existing access control framework of the TCSEC.   The TCSEC specifies two
types of  controls:  Discretionary Access Controls  (DAC)  and  Mandatory
Access Controls (MAC).  Since the TCSEC's appearance in December of 1983,
DAC requirements  have been  perceived  as being technically  correct for
commercial and civil security needs, as well as for single-level military
systems.   MAC is used  for multi-level secure military systems,  but its
use in other applications  is rare.   The need  for access controls  more
appropriate  to the commercial  and civil sector,  than that of DAC,  was
found  to exist.   There  is a need  for DAC,  but DAC  falls short  when
implemented alone  in solving the wide breath of security problems facing
sensitive processing environments.

The remainder of this section describes the applicability of DAC and MAC,
as well  as other access control approaches, to the policy needs of those
organization interviewed.

3.3.2.1    Discretionary Access Control

DAC plays  an important role  in supporting security requirements of many
organizations,  especially within  engineering  and research environments
where the discretionary  sharing of access and exchange of information is
important.   For many organizations,  users must be able  to specify what
access  other users  have to  resources  that they control,  without  the
intercession of an administrator.  This makes the controls discretionary.
Within  a true  DAC  environment,  the  ability  for  a  user  to  access

                                      3 – 7



information is dynamic and changes rapidly over short periods.

Organizations  expressed  concerns  about relying  solely on  DAC  as the
primary means of protection.  Specifically,  they were concerned with the
propagation of access rights,  reliance on the cooperation of users, and,
to a lesser extent, DAC's vulnerabilities to a Trojan Horse.

Some organizations expressed concern  over exactly who has the capability
to specify  group membership.   By granting membership  to a group,  user
access rights  to protected  data  can  dynamically  change  without  the
knowledge of the owner of that data.  For some organizations, the ability
to specify group membership was described  as appropriately placed at the
project level,  while for other organizations,  group membership was more
appropriately placed  at the security officer  level.   The organizations
were concerned  with  this  capability  and  would  like  the  option  of
specifying control  over group ownership  within their  computer systems.
In addition,  the ability to list group membership before granting access
privileges to that group  was considered  by some  as a necessary part of
this capability.

The most common approach  to implementing DAC  is through  access control
lists  (ACLs).   The TCSEC  encouraged  ACLs  as  appropriate  for  user-
controlled access rights.  However, when centrally administered, ACLs can
become clumsy and difficult to maintain. In centrally administrating DAC,
the system administrator  assumes  responsibility  for ownership  of  all
resources,  determining what resources and modes of access are needed for
the performance  of each user's function  within  the organization.   For
each  new  user   or   every  change   in  responsibility,   the  central
administrator  establishes  the  appropriate  access  rights  within  the
system.  Additionally, when a person leaves the organization, the central
administrator deletes the person  from all ACLs within the system.   Many
of the organizations felt ACLs were difficult for the central control and
management of access rights.

3.3.2.2    Role-Based Controls

Many organizations preferred a centrally administered,  non-discretionary
set of controls  to meet their security policies and objectives.   During
the course  of this study,  organizational policies  and objectives  have
included maintaining  and enforcing  the rules and ethics associated with
a judge's chambers,  and the laws  and respect  for privacy of diagnosing
ailments, treating of disease,  and administering of medicine within a VA
hospital.   To support such policies,  a capability  to centrally control
and  maintain access rights  is needed.   The security  administrator  is
responsible for enforcing policy  and represents the organization  as the
"owner"  of system objects.   Access control decisions  were found  to be
based  on the roles  individual users take on as part of an organization.
This includes the specification of duties, responsibilities, obligations,
and  qualifications.   For example,  the roles  included  doctor,  nurse,
clinician, or pharmacist associated with a VA hospital; or teller or loan
officer associated  with a  banking system.   The doctor's  role includes
privileges to perform diagnoses,  prescribe medication, or add a entry to

                                      3 – 8



(not simply modify)  a record of treatments performed on a patient.   The
privileges defined  for the role  of pharmacist include those to dispense
(not prescribe) prescription drugs.

The determination  of membership  and the allocation  of privileges  to a
role  is not so much  in accordance  with discretionary decisions  on the
part  of   a  system  administrator,   but  rather  in  compliance   with
organization-specific  protection  guidelines.   These guidelines  derive
from existing laws, ethics, regulations, or generally accepted practices.
The  guidelines  are  non-discretionary   in  the  sense  that  they  are
unavoidably  imposed  on  users.   For example,  a doctor  can  prescribe
medication, but cannot pass that privilege on to a nurse.

Once roles are established  within the system,  the privileges associated
with these roles  remain relatively constant  or change slowly over time.
The administrative task  is then to grant  and revoke user membership  to
the set  of specified  roles  within the  system.   The capability  of an
administrator to simply grant and delete membership to existing roles has
been described as desirable.   When a user's function changes  within the
organization,  the user's membership  to existing roles  should be easily
deleted  and  new ones  granted.   Finally,  when  a  person  leaves  the
organization,  all of that person's memberships to all roles are deleted.
For an organization  that experiences  a large turnover  of personnel,  a
role-based implementation security policy is the only logical choice.

The NIST study team  talked  with several organizations  that felt  role-
based access  or access based  on function  was a control  more suited to
their  needs  than  DAC or  MAC.   While  add-on packages  will  give  an
organization  access  based on function  for  their  systems,  role-based
access  control  should  be  generally  promoted  as  are  DAC  and  MAC.
Currently  no standard  exists to promote  the wide availability of role-
based access control.

3.3.2.3    Separation of Transactions

Separation of transactions  is a design and implementation approach which
partitions  a task-oriented  set  of programs  and  data.   This  set  is
available  to a specific  user  who  is  allowed  access  only  to  these
resources.   A group of available transactions  define  a particular task
that  can  be  assumed  by  a  user.   Although  similar,  separation  of
transactions  differs  from role-based control  in that creation of roles
and  the granting of membership  to roles are  an administrative function
while the underlying access control rules  enforced through separation of
transactions  is achieved  through  a combination  of administrative  and
transaction-design decisions.

Because of the stable functionality and the deterministic characteristics
of transactions  within some organizations,  security engineers  or those
knowledgeable of security issues  facing an organization  (i.e., privacy,
data integrity, etc.) play an important role in specifying access-control
decisions during the design and development of the system.   For example,
for one organization,  transactions were designed  to retrieve  an entire

                                      3 – 9



customer  record  minus   the  customer's  social  security  number.   In
addition,  design-time access control decisions  can consider aggregation
problems that  are difficult  to  address  within  conventional  run-time
access  control environments.   Security guidelines  are addressed by the
designer  and developers of a transaction or by direct involvement in the
design and development effort of proposed transactions.

Once a transaction has been developed and introduced into the operational
environment, a security administrator may assign the named transaction to
specific  users   or  user  groups.    The  importance  of  control  over
transactions, as opposed to simple read and write access,  can be seen by
considering a simple banking transaction.   Tellers may execute a savings
deposit transaction,  requiring read  and write access to specific fields
within  a  savings  file  and a  transaction  log  file.   An  accounting
supervisor  may be  able to execute  correction  transactions,  requiring
exactly the same read  and write access  to the same files as the teller.
The difference  is the process  executed  and the values  written  to the
transaction log file.

A major insurance company  enforces its corporate policy  through the use
of  separation  of  transactions.   Within  the organization,  each  unit
(performing a specified task) is assigned a collection of transactions to
perform  an assigned task  or function.   A unit  security  administrator
determines" what users  get access  to what  transactions, " within  that
unit.   The security administer can add and delete users to the unit, but
cannot assign transactions to individuals outside the unit.

3.3.2.4    Separation of Related Duties

Although more of a policy than a mechanism,  separation of related duties
is used  in deterring fraud  within financial systems.   Such duties  can
include authorizing,  approving,  and recording transactions,  issuing or
receiving  assets,  and making  payments.   Separation of related  duties
refers  to the situation  where different users  are given distinct,  but
often interrelated tasks  such that a failure  of one user  to perform as
expected  will be detected by another.   For separation of related duties
to be  effective,  computer  capabilities  must  be  partitioned.   These
capabilities  must be  accessible only to users  or processes  associated
with specific tasks.

Several  organizations  described the need  for an  add-on  capability of
separation of related duties.   One example  would be a program or device
to separate users  who authorize or commit  the expenditure of funds from
those authorized to place orders for services and equipment.  The IRS has
used this policy as a requirement  from the outset and a system with this
capability was developed especially for them.

3.3.2.5    Principle of Least Privilege

The  principle  of  least  privilege  was  described  by  some  of  those
interviewed as an important control approach in meeting security policies
and objectives.   This principle gives the user no more privilege then is

                                     3 – 10



necessary to  perform  a  job.   Implementing  least  privilege  requires
identifying  what  the  user's  job is,  determining  the minimum  set of
privileges  required to perform that job,  and restricting the user  to a
domain  with those  privileges.   Least privilege  allows a user  to have
different levels of privilege at different times,  depending on what task
is being  performed.   By denying  access to transactions  and privileges
that  are  not  necessary  for the  performance  of their  duties,  those
privileges  cannot be used  to circumvent  the organizational  protection
policy.   Least privilege  is particularly  important  for those  systems
where there  is a "privileged user"  or "superuser" capability that would
otherwise grant a wide set of privileges to users that need only a subset
of those privileges.

The  principle   of  least  privilege   is  similar  to   separation   of
transactions.   It differs  in that separation  of transactions restricts
the set of programs that can access data and places restrictions on which
users  can execute  what programs.   Least privilege  restricts  a user's
access to data by denying users  privileges that are not necessary  to do
their job.

Several  organizations  would like  an operating system  capability  that
supports the principle of least privilege.   This capability is currently
supported  in  upper  end  secure  systems   (B2  and  above),  but  many
organizations expressed the desire to see this capability at a more basic
level.

3.3.2.6    Label-Based Mandatory Access Controls

The other form of access control  specified in the Orange Book  is label-
based  mandatory  access  control.   MAC  is a  non-discretionary  access
control,  restricting users in their access to data on levels implemented
through labels.  These are (1) the level associated with the trust of the
user, i.e., clearance,  and (2) the level associated with the sensitivity
of the data.

Forming an alliance  among companies  that are otherwise  competitors was
cited  as a  reason  to enforce  a confidentiality policy.   For such  an
alliance to exist, the ability to isolate and share information on a non-
discretionary, formal "need-to-know" basis is required.

The formal  "need-to-know"  has primary emphasis on categories and,  to a
lesser extent,  on hierarchical levels.  The term  "category"  is used to
describe non-hierarchical separation.  Outside the DoD, few organizations
operate  using hierarchical  levels.   Most  non-DoD  organizations  have
employees  and   users  belonging  to  one  level,   but  with  different
responsibilities, i. e., in different categories.

For  example,   a  commercial  organization  recently   formed  strategic
alliances with  some of its competitors.   Although this organization has
always  allowed  access   to  some  of  its  most  sensitive  proprietary
information  by outside consultants,  this access was narrow and limited.
Because of the frequency  and scope of past access requirements, physical

                                     3 – 11



and procedural measures  could provide the necessary isolation.  However,
the physical and procedural controls  of the past have become impractical
with  current information needs.   The only practical solution  is label-
based mandatory categorization.   This type of access would allow limited
partnership between competitors.

As business alliances become a corporate reality for many U.S. companies,
label-based  mandatory  access  controls   will  become  more  important.
Currently,  label-based  MAC  is not  generally available  as part  of an
operating system, but it can be added.

3.3.2.7    Object-Label Association

The ability  to  associate  a  label  (not  necessarily  used  in  access
decisions) with an object was described as a needed capability by several
organizations interviewed.   These labels would carry warning,  advisory,
and other information associated with an object and would not be used for
making  mandatory  access  control  decisions.   For  example,  within  a
hospital system,  a label would associate  a warning  with a prescription
drug,  i.e.,  "not for  use  if person  has  high blood  pressure".   The
association  between a drug  and a warning  is an important relationship.
For  medical  systems  in  general,   the  capability   to  associate  an
information label describing the quality of an x-ray,  CATscan, sonogram,
or  any other image  shared among medical professionals,  can be a  vital
capability.   Currently, object-label association is neither a capability
available within most systems nor encouraged through security standards.

3.3.3      User Accountability

User accountability means holding individual users  responsible for their
actions.   Imposing  a  policy  of  accountability  on system  users  was
described by organizations  as both a detection  and deterrent mechanism.
This  implies  that an individual  is knowledgeable  of some  standard of
conduct and answerable  to a higher authority who may impose penalties on
those who fail to adhere to this standard.  Also, making users aware that
their actions  are being monitored  is  thought  to  prevent  a  would-be
violator from committing a breach of security.

Individual accountability is accomplished through:

     o     uniquely identifying and authenticating the individual user;

     o     authorizing access to the system;

     o     generating an audit trail of security relevant events; and

     o     reviewing  the  database   of  security  relevant  events  for
           deviations from some specified standard of conduct.

Although  acknowledging vulnerabilities  with the process  of identifying
and   authenticating   an  individual,   organizations  are  aware   that
technological  solutions  are  available,  but not  yet  affordable.   In

                                     3 – 12



addition,  they recognize  that existing  administrative  interfaces  are
inadequate for an effective review  of the database  of security-relevant
events.   This was  especially true  for environments  doing  distributed
processing.

A  related  issue  raised in  a few  interviews  was  intrusive  employee
monitoring/surveillance.   A few  organizations  indicated  employees  or
their representatives  had expressed concern  about potential misuses  of
increasingly sophisticated data gathering and analysis tools.

NIST should promote incorporating computer security auditing standards in
products.   Those interviewed  expressed frustration with various aspects
of  auditing  computer  security  events.    Current  auditing  features,
although  sufficient  in  meeting evaluation  criteria,  are  of  limited
practical use  in distributed  and  networked  environments.   There  was
limited understanding of what events should be audited,  what information
should be collected,  what form that information should be in, and how to
compare  and consolidate  the information  from  one  system  to another.
Interoperability  and a  common  format  for  auditing  security-relevant
events is needed.  Common formats would facilitate the central collection
and reduction of security-relevant events.  This is integral to achieving
security in the heterogeneous, distributed environment many organizations
are facing.


3.4  Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)

EDI  is the  computer-to-computer  interchange  of messages  representing
business documents.   Most organizations  expect EDI  to become  a common
part  of their  business practices.   They recognize  that while EDI  can
provide an opportunity for improved efficiency,  it has the potential for
additional risk.

Some expressed concern  that by using EDI technology,  original hard-copy
evidence of obligation  and commitment by concerned parties  would not be
available.   For EDI  to be a  practical alternative  to paper,  specific
assurances must be provided  that EDI messages are authentic and properly
authorized.    The  goal  of  EDI  technology  is  to  provide  the  same
capabilities  as traditional paper-based  administrative  functions  with
more efficiently and the same level of trust.


3.5  Assurance and Quality

The  assurance  associated  with a  product  is  a  relative  measurement
reflecting the degree of confidence that the product meets its functional
specification  or policy.   Assurance is gained through  using evaluation
criteria  as  a  metric.   These  assurances  demonstrate  that  security
functionality supports  the services  specified  by the claimed  security
policy and that the associated policy enforcement mechanisms are correct,
dependable and, to some degree, free of flaws.


                                     3 – 13



Security assurance is an important factor  in a secure system development
effort  and  an important element  of an  existing  or  emerging security
standard.  The desired level and types of specific assurance requirements
are, at best, difficult to assess.  Most of those interviewed, felt that,
at a minimum, security features should be implemented with the same level
of  confidence,  quality,  and robustness  as other  non-security-related
operating environment system features.

Several organizations felt that, in addition to assurances, a quality set
of security services should some how be promoted.   Quality was described
as including performance,  ease of use,  and continued compatibility with
existing capabilities and applications.   Meeting assurance requirements,
even  at the  higher levels,  does not guarantee  or even  promote  these
quality factors.  However, specifying requirements for both assurance and
quality  would promote  greater confidence  in an  effective  and  robust
implementation of security features that exists today.

Some interviewees  said that they saw a general increase  in the level of
quality  in computer products  and felt a higher degree of confidence  in
those products.   However, they could not report  comparable improvements
in the security features  associated with new system releases or versions
of systems,  or the confidence they had in them.   One aspect  of quality
notably  missing   from  security  features   is  a  friendly  user   and
administrator  interface.   This is particularly apparent  when  managing
ACLs,  reviewing audit  reports,  and  administering passwords.   Several
interviewees  felt  that  resolving  such   problems  would  enhance  the
effectiveness of security.

A sizable segment  of those interviewed  felt that the  current assurance
and evaluation process  is not  cost-effective.   The security associated
with many systems  and applications  should not be viewed any differently
than any  other aspect  of the system.   It should be subject to the same
cost-benefit analysis  as other features.  In regard to assurance levels,
a basic  level  needs to  accommodate  the notion of  generally  accepted
commercial practices.

For  the majority  of  organizations  interviewed,  a moderate  level  of
assurance  was described  as appropriate.   However,  there is a class of
software/hardware systems  where it is necessary that the system be shown
to be  probably correct  with respect  to  some aspects  of  its  trusted
operation.   As noted, maintaining the confidentiality of classified data
within a military system  may warrant such a confidence level.   However,
critical systems  exist outside the military.   Security functionality is
critical  to electronic funds  transfer  systems,  as  is  safety  within
avionic  and  transportation  control systems.   In  addition,  with  the
increased use  of embedded computers in medical systems, improved methods
of assuring their correct operation becomes increasingly important.


3.6  Evaluation

The process  of security evaluation  validates  the functionality  of the

                                     3 – 14



features as well as assurances of a system.

The current process of evaluation  was described  to those interviewed by
the NIST study team  as being  an adjunct to the assurance process.   The
evaluation  process  is  not  without  its  costs  in  terms  of  product
development  costs,  development  delays,  and  its  availability.    The
development costs included  the production of evaluation evidence  (which
in  many  cases  is  not  necessarily   a  byproduct   of  normal  system
development), additional phases and activities added to the system design
and   development,   and  enhanced   architectural   requirements.    The
availability and development delays included evaluation time and evidence
preparation time.

Those interviewed  were almost uniformly  concerned with the cost.   Some
interviewees  expressed concerns  about vendors  passing along  the added
design  and development  cost to the customer.   Another concern  was the
availability  of evaluated products.   Most noted  that the products they
were currently using  were not  the same version  as the product that was
evaluated.

Even  with the visibility  and concern  over the  costs  associated  with
evaluation,  most organizations recognized  a need for an independent and
faster evaluation.  Surprisingly, there was not strong support for vendor
self-assertion with respect to evaluations.  Most organizations possessed
a basic distrust for vendors based on past experiences.

Many  organizations  also took  exception  with  the  current  format  of
evaluations  and viewed them as limited in scope.   It was suggested that
evaluations  include other security-related aspects  such as performance,
ease of use,  compatibility with existing applications  and hardware, and
interoperability issues.   Some even suggested  that a "Consumer Report"-
style product assessment  would be useful.   Such a report  would support
their  procurement  needs as well  as provide incentives  for vendors  to
develop a quality set  of user  and administrator interfaces  rather than
meeting minimum requirements.

Most organization representatives  viewed the performance  of evaluations
in a stand-alone laboratory environment  as unrealistic  for their actual
operating environments.   Of all the organizations  interviewed,  not one
processed  in a stand-alone  environment.   Almost all organizations  had
intelligent workstations directly  or remotely connected through a local-
area network.


3.7  Current Criteria Not Keeping Pace

Although advances  have been great,  several organizations  stressed that
the current state of security technology  has failed to address the needs
of all.   This is especially true  of organizations  outside the DoD  who
felt  little attention  has been paid  to current criteria  in addressing
their security requirements.


                                     3 – 15



Trusted  technology  has also failed  to  keep  pace  with  technological
advances  in  information  processing.    Existing  security  theory  and
criteria are founded on the multi-user stand-alone computing environment,
such as the mainframe computer.  However, the trend is toward distributed
storage, processing, and communication functions, on low-cost specialized
machines on a network.   The network  is becoming the computer.   Current
product  evaluations  exclude  general  network  facilities,  while  many
computers are installed in networks.

The Trusted Network Interpretation  (TNI)  of the TCSEC  was developed to
address the security network issue.   It provides security evaluation and
design criteria  for networks of systems  that are developed,  installed,
and  administered  as  though  they were a  single  time-sharing  system.
However,  most organizations procure systems  in an evolutionary  fashion
with new computer resources added,  replaced,  deleted,  and added again.
The system may be connected to another network  which may be connected to
still another network.  The TNI does not address this evolution.

3.8  Need for Security in Open Systems

Those  interviewed   felt  that  security  standards   which   allow  the
comprehensive implementation  to integrate security across a multi-vendor
environment have failed to emerge.  It should be possible to:

     o     interface many systems, both present and future;

     o     provide a single user view  of security services across a wide
           range of operating systems; and

     o     have  security  features  interoperate   with  other  security
           services on both local  and remote machines,  without the need
           to train users in new security products.

The need  to  implement  security  should  not limit  an organization  in
choosing the best solution and integrating it into their existing system.
Security technology must support users working effectively together.


3.9  Owner-Custodian Relations

Organizations assume a certain risk when they permit their information to
be transmitted over a commercial  or public network  and used by computer
systems they do not control.   They are aware that simply connecting to a
network  can increase the vulnerability  of their  own computer system to
hackers or malicious software.  Some users conclude that,  in addition to
providing mechanisms  to protect information  on their own systems,  they
need  to consider  the security  implications  of sharing resources  with
subscribers  on  other  systems.    When  an  information  owner   passes
information  to another system  for use  on that system,  the user  wants
assurance that information  is protected  in accordance  with the owner's
protection criteria.


                                     3 – 16



In an owner-custodian relationship, there is a transfer of responsibility
for safeguarding  information  from one party  to another.   In practical
terms,  the owner of the information defines what protection it requires;
any system  that processes  the information  must ensure  that the system
security policy satisfies the owner's protection policy.

An example  is a military contractor  who protects classified information
using DoD policy.   Another example  is the Financial Intelligence Center
(FINCEN)  of the  Department  of the Treasury.   To be effective  in  its
counter-narcotic efforts, FINCEN must interact and share information with
other law enforcement organizations, such as the Coast Guard, IRS, Secret
Service, postal inspection, gambling commissions, banks, etc.  FINCEN, as
a custodian of information  belonging to a large number of organizations,
must provide  security services  that can  be demonstrated  effective  at
meeting a variety of security policies.


3.10  Security Policies and Environments Can Change Over Time

For many organizations, security requirements cannot always be considered
at  the  outset   of  system   procurement,   or  service   or  custodial
establishment.    For  these  organizations,  the  ability  to  integrate
security into existing processing environments in an evolutionary fashion
is critical.  All of  the organizations interviewed  reported significant
changes   in  their  environments,   as  new  computer   and  information
technologies are acquired.   In some cases, the changes are new customers
or  new alliances  with other organizations.   Some of  the organizations
interviewed  became custodians of others' data, in some instances data of
their competitors,  as well  as  their own  data.   In  some  situations,
organizations  faced  changing  requirements  regarding  with  whom  they
exchange data.

In addition,  threats can change over time.   For example,  attackers can
devise  new techniques.   Hidden vulnerabilities  can be discovered after
system  deployment.   Vulnerabilities  can also  be missed  during system
evaluation and discovered in operational use.

















                                     3 – 17



4    CONCLUSIONS

The NIST study team  concluded that computer security is applied uniquely
in each situation  even though there are  common concerns in all sectors.
Because each organization  has unique  security needs,  security products
have been applied  on a  case-by-case basis  to meet  individual computer
security  threats.    Security  at  the  operating   system  level,   the
application level,  the organizational level,  and the site level must be
considered.   Products  need to be  flexible  enough  to  serve  a  broad
spectrum of security needs.

Considerations  must be made  for the reality  that security requirements
evolve  and   cannot  be  totally  specified   at  the  time  of  product
acquisition.   Security capabilities  need  to  include  new  system  and
network connections.  Security managers need to be aware of changing laws
and regulations.

At the operating system level, basic capabilities need to be adaptable to
a  variety   of  organizational   policies   and   applications.    These
capabilities should include security extensions  that allow more security
to be added  at a  later date.   These  extensions  can  include  trivial
password   checkers,   system  built   options,   and   enhanced   system
administrative  capabilities,  such as setting  minimum-length  password,
creating roles, granting and revoking access and capabilities).

More classes of operating systems beyond C2  with more flexibility within
the  classes  are needed.   Users  are concerned  with  computer security
issues beyond confidentiality and disclosure.  There is a need to address
data integrity in a more direct and user-friendly manner.  Vendors should
consider new mechanisms  that more directly address  such things as role-
based access controls,  separation of duties, separation of transactions,
and user-oriented least privilege.


4.1  Minimum Security Requirements

A majority  of those interviewed  wanted a baseline  of computer security
controls  in the  systems they  purchase.   These would  include  a  more
flexible DAC, role-based non-discretionary access controls, and principle
of  least  privilege.    While  acknowledging   their  responsibility  in
determining security requirements,  they saw value  in knowing that their
systems met a pre-existing computer security baseline.

4.1.1      Baseline Capabilities

While DAC was considered useful,  that capability was not flexible enough
for  group  membership.   A number  of organizations  were  administering
access control policies based on the roles or job functions of its staff.
However,  these policies were implemented  by mechanisms,  such as access
control lists,  that were not designed  to facilitate  a role-based world
view.


                                      4 – 1



Organizations  felt  that  role-based   or  access-based  functions  were
controls  more suited  to their needs than DAC  or MAC.   While there are
add-on packages  that provide this function,  this type of access control
should be as widely promoted  as are DAC and MAC.   Lack of standards for
role-based access control contributes to the problem.

Within DAC environments,  organizations need control over group ownership
within  their computer systems.   In addition,  the ability to list group
membership before granting access privileges to that group was considered
to be necessary.

Several  organizations  described   the  need  for  an  operating  system
capability  that  supports   the  principle  of  least  privilege.   This
capability  is currently supported  in upper-end  secure systems  (B2 and
above),  but  many  organizations   expressed  the  desire  to  see  this
capability at a more basic level.


4.2  Computer Security Features Enabled by Default

Vendors  should  deliver  computer  security  systems  with the  security
features turned on  or enabled.   This would provide  an initial security
state and  enforce a disciplined  consideration  of those features  to be
disabled.   A very small minority  wanted computer systems delivered with
the security features turned off.   They wanted  the choice of turning on
only  those  features  they needed  in order  to not excessively  inhibit
system performance.


4.3  Assurance

Most organizations  felt evaluation criteria should include  a wide range
of  assurance levels.   This includes  a  "generally accepted  commercial
practice"  level which minimizes  the cost of developing systems  and the
length  of  time  associated  with  evaluation.   Evidence  used  in  the
assurance process  should be founded  on a sound base  of experience  and
observations.   Evidence should be limited  to that which has shown to be
beneficial in the past, not that which, in theory, should be beneficial.


4.4  Evaluation

The current evaluation  and certification process  (i.e., with respect to
TCSEC) is not perceived by users  as meeting their needs for a variety of
reasons.   One reason cited was the time lag between new product releases
and  formal  certification.    Another  reason   was  that  the  existing
certification  process  does not  address other  issues  associated  with
operational   environments,   such   as   effectiveness   of   mechanism,
performance,   version   compatibility,   adaptability,   and   ease   of
integration.

Each organization felt that the products they acquired needed to be

                                      4 – 2



evaluated  regarding security features  and assurances.   None  felt that
vendor self-certification or vendor representation were adequate.   While
a  few wanted  to do  a portion  of the evaluation  themselves,  the vast
majority  wanted  an  independent  third  party  evaluation.   A  federal
government-operated or  commercial government-accredited  process was the
most desirable.  Many factors contributed to each organization's attitude
toward   certification,   including  sensitivity  of   the  applications,
corporate  culture,  time and  cost considerations,  mission criticality,
past experience with vendors, and availability of assessment sources.


4.5  Administration

The  vast   majority   of  the  organizations   interviewed   felt   that
administering  computer  security,   particularly  access  control,   was
burdensome  in a  heterogeneous,  distributed  environment.   Given their
other responsibilities, this function took more time and effort than they
felt was appropriate.

Interviewees wanted computer security-related  products that would easily
implement  organization security policy  and  manage security  functions.
These functions included  centralized network security administration and
single  logon for network  data  and services.   Organizations felt  that
improved security administrator  interfaces were essential to balance the
increasing need  for protection  and limitations  on the  staff resources
devoted to it.

4.5.1      Password Management

Most organizations  felt that vendors  should provide  a strong  password
management  capability  at the operating system  level  and it  should be
tailorable to specific environmental needs.   Along with that,  most felt
NIST  should continue  to promote  research on improving the integrity of
the identification  and  authentication  process.   Technologies  such as
smart cards,  signature verification,  and  voice authentication  have  a
potential place  in an overall approach  to security.   However, for most
organizations, only a low-cost solution would be practical due to a large
number of users.

4.5.2      EDI Capabilities

For  EDI  to be  a  practical  alternative  to  the  exchange  of  paper,
organizations  want specific assurances  that EDI messages  are authentic
and  properly authorized.   The goal of EDI technology  is to provide the
same capabilities  as traditional  paper-based  administrative  functions
with more  efficiently and the same level  of trust.   This requires  EDI
standards that are part of the baseline operating system.


4.6  Add-on Packages

Several  organizations  described  the  need  for  a  variety  of  add-on

                                      4 – 3



products.   In some  cases,  these products  are available,  but  do  not
interface with the  already-purchased computer systems.   In those cases,
organizations felt that the add-on packages  should be capable of working
with a wider variety of machines.

An add-on package  that provides separation  of related duties is needed.
Currently, this feature must be contracted out.  Object-label association
is  neither  a  capability  available  within  most  systems  nor  is  it
encouraged through  security standards.  Organizations were interested in
add-on products that would meet this need.   They also felt that security
standards for object-label association should be developed.

Currently,  label-based  mandatory  access  controls  are  not  generally
available as part of the operating system, but as an add-on.   Since this
type of access control  will be used  more and more by companies  forming
alliances  with  competitors,   the  capability   to  isolate  and  share
information on a non-discretionary,  formal "need-to-know"  basis will be
required.


4.7  Current Criteria

Although advances  have been great,  several organizations  stressed that
the current state of security technology criteria has failed to keep pace
with technological advances in information processing.  Computer security
criteria needs to be kept current.  In addition, criteria which addresses
the evolving technology of networked computers is needed.

Current  criteria  also does not  address procurement  in an evolutionary
fashion with computers interconnected to networks.


4.8  Security Standards for Multi-Vendor Systems

Those interviewed  felt that security standards  that allow comprehensive
implementation of security  across a multi-vendor environment have failed
to emerge.  The possible standards would provide for:

     o     interfacing many systems, both present and future;

     o     a single user view of security services across a wide range of
           operating systems; and

     o     security features inter-operating with other security services
           on both local  and remote machines,  without the need to train
           users in new security products.

The need  to implement  security  should not  limit  an  organization  in
choosing the best solution and integrating it into their existing system.
Security technology must support users working effectively together.



                                      4 – 4


4.9  Closing Thoughts

Because  each organization  has unique security needs,  security products
have been applied on a case-by-case basis  in meeting individual computer
security   threats.    Security  at  the  operating  system  level,   the
application level,  the organizational level,  and the site level must be
considered.   Products  need  to  flexible  enough  to  consider  a broad
spectrum of security needs.

At the operating system level,  basic capabilities  that are adaptable to
a variety of organizational policies  and applications need to be part of
a computer security baseline.   These capabilities would be extensions so
that more security  can be inserted,  such as a trivial password checker,
or system  build-in options,  as well  as enhanced  system administrative
capabilities,  such as setting  minimum-length password,  creating roles,
granting and revoking access and capabilities.

Security requirements  evolve and cannot be totally specified at the time
of product acquisition.  Security capabilities need to include new system
and  network connections,  while security managers  need  to be aware  of
changing laws and regulations.
































                                      4 – 5


                                  APPENDIX A:
                              LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS

The  following  are the  organizations  the  NIST  study  team  met  with
between  March  and  June  1991,  grouped by  categories.  The categories
are  subjective.   All  of the federal government  agencies  are part  of
the Executive  Branch,  except  for the Federal  Judicial  Center,  which
is part of the Judicial Branch.

                                   GOVERNMENT

                                     FEDERAL

Law Enforcement
     Treasury-Financial crimes Enforcement Network
     Treasury-Financial Intelligence Center (FINCEN)
     Federal Judicial Center

Defense-Related
     U.S. Army
     Department of Energy
     Strategic Defense Initiative-National Test Bed
     Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
     Air Force Cryptologic Support Center

Space
     NASA-Goddard
     NASA-Johnson Space Flight Center

Regulatory
     Food and Drug Administration
     Federal Aviation Administration

Tax Collection/Enforcement
     Treasury-Internal Revenue Service

Benefits Delivery/Service
     Social Security Administration
     US Postal Service
     US Department of Agriculture
     Department of Veterans Affairs

                                  STATE/LOCAL

Multiple-Agencies
     State of California Agencies







                                 APPENDIX A - 1



                                   COMMERCIAL

Financial/credit
     Bank of America
     Mellon Bank
     TRW Credit Information Services

Communications
     Pacific Bell
     Bellcore

Energy
     Mobil

Insurance
     USAA

Manufacturers/Vendors
     IBM
     Levi Strauss

Service
     SAIC
     Rockwell International
     American Express TRS




























                                 APPENDIX A - 2



                                   APPENDIX B:
                             SAMPLING OF JOB TITLES

A  sampling  of  job titles  of the  approximately  120  people  that the
NIST study team met with includes:

Federal Government

Analyst
Chief,	Control, Audit, and Security
Chief,	Systems Branch
Chief,	Information Resources Branch
Chief,	Information Security Section
Chief,	Cardiology Section
Chief,	Program Automation
Chief,	Computer Security Division
Chief		(IRM)
Computer Security official
Data Administration Section Head
Director, Medical Information Section
Manager, IRM Documentation
Manager, Advanced Systems
Manager, AIS Security
Program Manager
Project Coordinator
Security Officer
Security Manager
Security Engineer
Senior Research Computer Scientist
Special Advisor
Supervisory Engineer

State

Information Security Officer
Security Disaster Recovery
State Information Security Manager
Telecom Systems Manager

Commercial

Director, Division Computer Security
Director, Production
Executive Director, Information
Information Security Manager
Manager,	Corporate Date Security
Manager,	Computer Security Planning
Manager,	Internal Audit
Manager,	Software Technology
Manager,	Business Systems
Manager,	Inter-enterprise Systems


                                 APPENDIX B - 1



Product Manager
Program Director
Project Manager
Security Manager
Senior System Engineer
Senior Planner
Systems Programmer
Vice President
Vice President, Corporate Information Security












































                                 APPENDIX B - 2



                                   APPENDIX C:
                                SAMPLE QUESTIONS
Below  is a  sample  of  questions  asked  and  issues  explored  in  the
interviews.  The  questions  represent  the  types of  information  being
sought, but not necessarily asked in the form stated below.

Major "Meta" Questions Explored During the Interviews

The  following questions  demonstrate  the broad issues  explored  during
the course of the interviews.

0     What are the major computer security issues and  concerns of  users
      of  computer  systems?   Is there a core  set  of  computer  system
      threats,  policies/objectives,  and requirements  that   apply   to
      federal and commercial applications?  If yes,  what  do  they  look
      like?

0     How well  do  the current  predefined  (TCSEC)  classes  serve  the
      needs of the users of trusted products?

0     What are the major system access  controls required?  Do  these  go
      beyond  traditional  discretionary   access   controls  (DAC)   and
      mandatory access controls (MAC)  (e.g., the significance  of roles,
      access control triples, and separation of duties)?

0     Should   there   be   more   flexibility   in   choosing   computer
      requirements (features and assurances)  that  contribute to  system
      trust.   Should  we  consider  the  separation   of  features   and
      assurances?

0     What  evaluation  process  would  best  serve  the  needs   of  the
      commercial and civil sectors?


General

0     How is the information processed by this  organization critical  or
      sensitive?

0     What is the  organization's  concept  of  trust as  it  applies  to
      computer systems?

0     What  legal  or   other   mandatory   requirements   exist   (e.g.,
      regulatory agency, professional  standards,  etc.)  to protect  the
      information managed by this system?

0     What  other   key  factors   drive   the   information   protection
      requirements of your systems?

0     What are the legal liabilities of  the organization  in  the  event
      of a failure to meet these requirements?

                                 APPENDIX C - 1



0     Does the organization own  or use products  that  are  specifically
      intended  to  incorporate computer  security features  and  provide
      assurances about those features  (so  called  "trusted  products")?
      Describe.

0     What  is   the  minimum   level   of   trust   required   to   meet
      organizational security requirements (example: TCSEC C2)?

0     What motivated acquiring these products?

0     What  factors are  expected to drive  future  security requirements
      for your organization?


Security objectives

0     Does  the  organization  have   policy/objectives  regarding  those
      products  incorporating  trust  or  reliance?    Does  the   policy
      address TCSEC class products or is there a customized policy?

0     What are  the primary  threats  to  your organization.   Are   they
      internal,  external,  other?   In general, what  are  the  inherent
      vulnerabilities of the system?

0     How  important   are  enforcement   policies/objectives   regarding
      confidentiality,  integrity,   availability,  non-repudiation,  and
      safety to your organization?

0     What are  the costs  associated  with  implementing and maintaining
      such a policy/set of objectives?

0     What policies/objectives  would best support your perceived  future
      security requirements?


Features

0     In  general,  what types  of safeguards/security features  are used
      to protect the security of the information in your system(s)?

0     Do the security features implemented  on the system get in the  way
      of performing operational  tasks?   How?  Is  your  security  worth
      its operational impact?

0     Which of these features are routinely disabled or not used?

0     Is the TCSEC used?  How  does  it  meet  the  security  needs?  Are
      there security features  that are associated  with  higher  classes
      that are desirable to your organization?

0     What  else  (policies/mechanisms)   would   be   desirable   (e.g.,
      distribution and maintenance of authority, EDI)?

                                 APPENDIX C - 2



0     Are records kept of system problems?

0     Is analysis performed regarding reported problems?

0     How is user logical access  to  the  system controlled?  (location,
      time, type of access, type terminal, etc.)

0     What methods are used to authenticate user access?

0     Does the system have an internal audit capability?

0     How often are the  audit  files  analyzed  for  security anomalies?
      What anomalies are considered?  How effective are  system  services
      at providing this capability?

0     What is the value  of an  intrusion detection  feature  (i.e.,  one
      that  watches  for  intrusion  by  recording  attempts  at  invalid
      actions)?

0     What approach  is used  at enforcing your  access  control  policy?
      (separate users  and information by levels, by categories; type  of
      privileges  granted   either  discretionary   or  administratively;
      roles that are performed  in  the  system;  separation  of  duties;
      access control triple; rotation of duties; etc.?)

0     Would  there  be  value  to  this  organization  in  strengthening,
      weakening, eliminating  MAC,  DAC,  I&A,  Auditing,  and  Assurance
      from future guidelines, criteria?


Assurance

0     What  confidence  level  is  required  for  the  system's  security
      features?

0     What means are used to  achieve this  level  of  confidence in  its
      computer  system's   security  features?    (example:   government-
      sponsored   evaluation,   manufacturer-performed   testing,  third-
      party lab testing, in-house testing)

0     Is  a  manufacturer's   declaration   of  conformity   to  security
      standards  used   to  support  trust  of   the  system's   security
      features?   Has  this  declaration   proven  to   be  accurate  and
      reliable?

0     What other assurance methods are used?  Why?

0     How can "good practice" be shown in the event of litigation?

0     What  is  the  (incremental)  value  of  higher  levels  of  trust/
      assurance?


                                 APPENDIX C - 3



0     Would the decoupling of features and assurance be of value?


Environment

0     Provide  a brief  description  of  the  organizational  information
      processing   environment,   including   the   physical    facility,
      communications network, hardware and software, and applications.

0     Are the applications  run considered to be distributed,  or do  you
      plan to operate them in a distributed mode in the future?

0     What internal or external agencies,  persons, etc. , have access to
      this information processing system? What is their relationship?

0     What do you  expect the current information system  to  be like  in
      the future?


Evaluation

0     What national or international standards are followed?

0     What certification procedures, if any, are used?

0     Would this organization  be willing to  rely on  a  secure  product
      that has not been evaluated by the NCSC?

0     Would it be willing to  rely on  a  secure  product  that has  been
      evaluated by a third party other then the NCSC?

0     Does the organization  simply require use of trusted products  such
      as operating systems  or  hardware,  or  does  it require  security
      evaluation of the entire system?



















                                 APPENDIX C - 4



                                   APPENDIX D:
               RELATED NIST ACTIVITIES AND SOURCES OF INFORMATION

NIST  documents  addresses  managerial,  administrative,  and  procedural
requirements - a necessary  complement to  technical requirements.   Call
the Computer Systems Laboratory  (CSL)  at  (301)975-2821 to receive NIST
Publication  List  91,  Computer  Security  Publications,   an  annotated
bibliography  of NIST  computer  security  documents.   Documents  can be
purchased  through  the  Government Printing Office  (GPO) at  (202) 783-
3238  and the  National Technical  Information Service  (NTIS)  at  (703)
487-4780.

CSL Bulletins  are  published  by NIST  and  each  presents  an  in-depth
discussion  of a single  topic of interest  to  the  information  systems
community.  Among  the  topics  are:  Bibliography of  Computer  Security
Glossaries,  Data Encryption Standard,  Guidance to  Federal Agencies  on
the  Use of  Trusted   Systems  Technology,   Review  of  Federal  Agency
Computer  Security   and  Privacy  Plans,   The  GOSIP  Testing  Program,
Security  Issues  in  the  Use of  Electronic  Data Interchange, and File
Transfer,  Access,  and Management.   Bulletins  are  available  from CSL
Publications,  NIST  B151,  Technology  Bldg.,   Gaithersburg,  MD  20899
telephone (301)975-2821 or FTS 879-2821.

The  National  Computer   Security  Center   (NCSC)   publishes  Compusec
Technical  Publications,  referred  to  as  the  "Rainbow Series."  These
documents  have been developed to support  the processing  and protection
of  classified data,  but contain information  that  may be  valuable  in
sensitive non-classified  environments.  Contact the  Center  (301)  766-
8729 for a list of publications.

There are  two sources  for definitions of computer security terms.  NCSC
has  a glossary,  NCSC-TG-004,  Glossary of Computer Security Terms.  CSL
has NISTIR 4659, Glossary of Computer Security Terminology.

The  NIST  Computer Security  Bulletin Board System  emphasizes  computer
security  issues.    The  bulletin  board  contains   various  types   of
reference materials,  including security-related seminar  and  conference
lists.  The bulletin  board's  number  is  (301)  948-5717  (300,1200  or
2400 baud), (301) 948-5140 (9600 baud), voice (301) 975-3359.

The  National  Security  Agency  sponsors  the  NCSC  Bulletin  Board  on
DOCKMASTER  which  and  serves  as a  focal  point  for  interacting  and
exchanging   computer  security-related  ideas  among   its  users.   For
information,   please  call,   in  Maryland,   (301)  850-4446;   outside
Maryland, (800) 336-3625.

NIST  and  NCSC  co-sponsor  the  National Computer  Security Conference,
held  in  the  Fall  annually  in  the  Baltimore-Washington  area.   The
conference  proceedings   cover  a  broad  range   of  computer  security
topics,   many  directly  related  to  the  subjects  addressed  in  this
report.    For  more  information   about  NCSC  conference   proceedings
contact the NIST Computer Security Division at (301) 975-2934.

                                 APPENDIX D - 1

