GENERALLY ACCEPTED SYSTEM SECURITY PRINCIPLES (GSSPs):  GUIDANCE ON
SECURING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT) SYSTEMS

For the security of any system to be strong, the system's owners
must consider three fundamental security areas:  management
controls, operational controls, and technical controls.  While
technical controls, such as encryption, digital signatures, or
firewalls, receive the most attention, inadequate operational
controls and the day-to-day administration of technical controls
often create the most vulnerabilities.  

Strong management controls are needed to tie all the aspects of
security together into a sensible protection strategy.  NIST
Special Publication 800-14, Generally Accepted Principles and
Practices for Securing Information Technology Systems, helps
organizations to improve their operational and management
controls.  This CSL Bulletin explains some of the needs which
GSSPs can solve and presents a set of generally accepted system
security principles developed by NIST. 

Needs
If you are concerned about these issues, you should consider the
application of GSSPs to solve different problems:

Support for electronic interchange.  When multiple organizations
conduct business together, the organizations become linked in a
way that may compromise one of the organizations.  For example,
Organization A gives Organization B computer accounts on A's
systems and someone breaks into Bþs computers and then uses B's
systems to break into A.  GSSPs define levels or types of
security that organizations can require for various types of
access to systems or data given to support electronic
interchange. 

Audit standards/baseline.  When an organization or an operating
unit of an organization is audited, confusion exists about a
reasonable baseline of security controls.  Many organizations
maintain baseline GSSPs (often called checklists).  While
security-savvy (and money-savvy) organizations recognize that
deviations from the baseline are often necessary, a baseline is
still helpful.  Often, it does not make sense to individually
study each control in each environment to determine the ideal (in
terms of costs and benefits) implementation, but to make a
general decision that will be þrightþ for most situations.  

Reduction of liability.  When something goes wrong in an
organization (affecting the organization, its customers, or other
external parties), the assignment of blame soon follows.  The
question arises whether the organization, its computer security
staff, or system administration staff followed a standard of due
care or diligence, or followed general standards or practices of
professional care.  GSSPs define standards of care.  

Awareness.  GSSPs promote awareness of security issues and
facilitate communications among organizations or interest groups. 
While not defining specific security practices, security
principles define a common beginning point for inter-
organizational discussions about security.

Promotion of computer security in IT products and services.  When
buying computer products, organizations buy that product's
security.  One important way to improve overall security across
all sectors is to improve the security that comes with products. 
GSSPs define security functions and assurances that manufacturers
can build into products.

Solutions
While no single effort fulfills all of these needs, NIST has
produced guidance related to baselines and awareness as well as
co-sponsoring a major international effort, the Common Criteria
Project, to promote IT security.  In addition, the Reference
section of this bulletin provides a list of GSSP-related
documents prepared by other organizations.

NIST Special Publication 800-14, Generally Accepted Systems
Security Principles and Practices for Securing Information
Technology Systems, and NIST Special Publication 800-12, An
Introduction to Computer Security:  The NIST Handbook address the
need for high-level principles and provide a baseline set of
practices.  These documents can help organizations begin the
process of defining common security practices.  Each community of
interest needs to develop their own set of standard practices. 
This decentralized approach allows the affected groups to spend
their security dollars and other resources where they are most
needed and appropriate.  For example, bank-to-bank money
transfers may need different controls than those needed for
competing organizations to share computer resources for a joint
project.

The GSSP document also provides a time- and resource-saving
baseline for internal or external audit.  However, there are
times when an organization will make sound and justified
decisions not to use some of the controls described here.  

GSSPs provide a baseline which is useful for addressing liability
issues.  The extent to which liability-related organizations or
entities (such as insurance firms, juries, or internal
organizations) make use of GSSPs is up to those entities.  GSSPs,
however, do not provide the "right answer" that fits all
organizations and situations.  In addressing liability, recognize
the most fundamental assumption of computer security:  computers
cannot ever be fully secured.  NIST strongly urges all parties
addressing liabilities to do so in a risk management framework.  

An international effort, called the Common Criteria, is the nexus
of several national efforts attempting to develop product
security specifications and evaluations.  NIST and the National
Security Agency from the U.S. and other governments (Canada, UK,
France, Germany, Netherlands) have recently published draft 1.0
of the Common Criteria and are working on implementation issues. 
The Common Criteria is specifically designed to allow communities
of interest to develop product specifications, called protection
profiles.

Generally Accepted System Security Principles 
The generally accepted security principles are based on
principles developed by Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development's (OECD) Guidelines for the Security of
Information Systems.  Developed in 1992, the OECD Guidelines 
provide a foundation from which governments and the private
sector, acting singly and in concert, can construct a framework
for securing IT systems.  The OECD Guidelines are the current
international guidelines which have been endorsed by the U.S.  In
developing principles, NIST drew upon the OECD Guidelines, added
material, combined some principles, and clarified others.

The eight principles provide an anchor on which to build IT
security programs.  The principles are intended to guide security
decisions; they are not designed to produce specific answers. 

Computer Security Supports the Mission of the Organization.   
Through the selection and application of appropriate safeguards,
security helps the organization's mission by protecting its
physical and financial resources, reputation, legal position,
employees, and other tangible and intangible assets. 
Unfortunately, security is sometimes viewed as thwarting the
mission of the organization by imposing poorly selected,
bothersome rules and procedures on users, managers, and systems. 

On the contrary, well-chosen security rules and procedures do not
exist for their own sake -- they are put in place to protect
important assets and support the organizational mission. 
Security, therefore, is a means to an end and not an end in
itself.  In a private-sector business, having good security is
usually secondary to the need to make a profit; security ought to
increase the firm's ability to make a profit.  In a public-sector
agency, security is usually secondary to the agency's providing
services to citizens.  Security, then, ought to help improve the
service provided to the citizen.

To act on this, managers need to understand both their
organizational mission and how each information system supports
that mission.  After a system's role has been defined, the
security requirements implicit in that role can be defined. 
Security can then be explicitly stated in terms of the
organization's mission. 

The roles and functions of a system may not be restricted to a
single organization.  In an inter-organizational system, each
organization benefits from securing the system.  For example, for
electronic commerce to be successful, each participant requires
security controls to protect their resources.  Good security on
the buyer's system also benefits the seller; the buyer's system
is less likely to be used for fraud or to be unavailable or
otherwise negatively affect the seller.  (The reverse is also
true.)

Computer Security is an Integral Element of Sound Management. 
Information and IT systems are often critical assets that support
the mission of an organization.  Protecting them can be as
important as protecting other organizational resources, such as
money, physical assets, or employees.  However, including
security considerations in the management of information and
computers does not completely eliminate the possibility that
these assets will be harmed.  Ultimately, managers must decide
what level of risk they are willing to accept, taking into
account the cost of security controls.

As with other resources, the management of information and
computers may transcend organizational boundaries.  When an
organization's information and IT systems are linked with
external systems, management's responsibilities extend beyond the
organization.  Management must know what general level or type of
security is employed on the external system(s) or seek assurance
that the external system provides adequate security for their
organization's needs.  

Computer Security Should Be Cost-Effective.  The costs and
benefits of security should be carefully examined in both
monetary and non-monetary terms to ensure that the cost of
controls does not exceed expected benefits.  Investments in
security should be appropriate and proportionate to the value of
and degree of reliance on the IT systems and to the severity,
probability, and extent of potential harm.  Requirements for
security vary, depending upon the particular IT system.

In general, security is a smart business practice.  By investing
in security measures, an organization can reduce the frequency
and severity of computer security-related losses.  For example,
an organization may estimate that it is experiencing significant
losses per year in inventory through fraudulent manipulation of
its IT system.  Security measures, such as an improved access
control system, may significantly reduce the loss.

Moreover, a sound security program can thwart hackers and reduce
the frequency of viruses.  Elimination of these threats can
reduce unfavorable publicity as well as increase morale and
productivity.

Security benefits have direct and indirect costs.  Direct costs
include purchasing, installing, and administering security
measures, such as access control software or fire-suppression
systems.  Additionally, security measures sometimes affect system
performance, employee morale, or retraining requirements.  All of
these must be considered in addition to the basic cost of the
control itself.  These additional costs may well exceed the
initial cost of the control (as is often seen, for example, in
the costs of administering an access control package).  Solutions
to security problems should not be chosen if they cost more, in
monetary or non-monetary terms, directly or indirectly, than
simply tolerating the problem.

Systems Owners Have Security Responsibilities Outside Their Own
Organizations.  If a system has external users, its owners have a
responsibility to share appropriate knowledge about the existence
and extent of security measures so that other users can be
confident that the system is adequately secure.  This does not
imply that all systems must meet any minimum level of security,
but does imply that system owners should inform their clients or
users about the nature of the security.

In addition to sharing information about security, organization
managers should act in a timely, coordinated manner to prevent
and to respond to breaches of security to help prevent damage to
others.  Taking such action should not jeopardize the security of
systems.

Computer Security Responsibilities and Accountability Should Be
Made Explicit.  The responsibility and accountability of owners,
providers, and users of IT systems and other parties concerned
with the security of IT systems should be explicit.  The
assignment of responsibilities may be internal to an organization
or may extend across organizational boundaries.  

Depending on organizational size, the computer security program
may be large or small, even a collateral duty of another
management official.  Even small organizations can prepare a
document that states organization policy and makes explicit
computer security responsibilities.  This element does not
specify that individual accountability must be provided for on
all systems.  For example, many information dissemination systems
do not require user identification or use other technical means
of user identification and, therefore, cannot hold users
accountable.

Computer Security Requires a Comprehensive and Integrated
Approach.  Providing effective computer security requires a
comprehensive approach that considers a variety of areas both
within and outside of the computer security field.  This approach
extends throughout the entire information life cycle.

To work effectively, security controls often depend upon the
proper functioning of other controls.  Many such
interdependencies exist.  If appropriately chosen, managerial,
operational, and technical controls can work together
synergistically.  On the other hand, without a firm understanding
of the interdependencies of security controls, they can actually
undermine one another.  For example, without proper training on
how and when to use a virus-detection package, the user may apply
the package incorrectly and, therefore, ineffectively.  As a
result, the user may mistakenly believe that if their system has
been checked once, it will always be virus-free, and the user may
inadvertently spread a virus.  In reality, these
interdependencies are usually more complicated and difficult to
ascertain.  

The effectiveness of security controls also depends on such
factors as system management, legal issues, quality assurance,
and internal and management controls.  Computer security needs to
work with traditional security disciplines including physical and
personnel security.  Many other important interdependencies exist
that are often unique to the organization or system environment. 
Managers should recognize how computer security relates to other
areas of systems and organizational management.

Computer Security Should Be Periodically Reassessed.  Computers
and the environments in which they operate are dynamic.  System
technology and users, data and information in the systems, risks
associated with the system, and security requirements are ever-
changing.  Many types of changes affect system security: 
technological developments (whether adopted by the system owner
or available for use by others); connection to external networks;
a change in the value or use of information; or the emergence of
a new threat.    

In addition, security is never perfect when a system is
implemented.  System users and operators discover new ways to
intentionally or unintentionally bypass or subvert security. 
Changes in the system or the environment can create new
vulnerabilities.  Strict adherence to procedures is rare and
procedures become outdated over time.  These issues make it
necessary to reassess periodically the security of IT systems.

Computer Security is Constrained by Societal Factors.  The
ability of security to support the mission of an organization may
be limited by various social factors.  For example, security and
workplace privacy can conflict.  Commonly, security is
implemented on an IT system by identifying users and tracking
their actions.  However, expectations of privacy vary and can be
violated by some security measures.  (In some cases, privacy may
be mandated by law.) 

Although privacy is an important societal issue, it is not the
only one.  The flow of information, especially between a
government and its citizens, is another situation where security
may need to be modified to support a societal goal.  In addition,
some authentication measures may be considered invasive in some
environments and cultures.

Security measures should be selected and implemented with a
recognition of the rights and legitimate interests of others. 
This involves balancing the security needs of information owners
and users with societal goals.  Note that rules and expectations
change with regard to the appropriate use of security controls;
these changes may increase or decrease security.

The relationship between security and societal norms is not
necessarily antagonistic.  Security can enhance the access and
flow of data and information by providing more accurate and
reliable information and greater availability of systems. 
Security can also increase the privacy afforded to an individual
or help achieve other goals set by society.

Conclusion
NIST and other organizations have established a strong groundwork
in the development of generally accepted system security
principles and in the development of practices appropriate for
baselines.  The next steps are the continued development of
generally accepted practices for specific applications.  These
should be developed by the users of the applications.  

References

Documents available on NIST's Computer Security Resource
Clearinghouse web page (http://csrc.nist.gov) are so noted.

British Standards Institution.  British Standard 7799, A Code of
Practice for Information Security.  1995

Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation,
Version 1.0.  1996.  (available electronically)

Datapro.  The Quest for Generally Accepted System Security
Principles (GSSP).  Delran, NJ, October 1994.

Ferraiolo, David et. al.  Minimum Security Requirements for
Multi-User Operating Systems.  NISTIR 5153.  National Institute
of Standards and Technology, March 1993.

Guttman, Barbara and Edward A. Roback.   An Introduction to
Computer Security:  The NIST Handbook.  Special Publication 800-
12.  National Institute of Standards and Technology, October
1995.  (available electronically)

The Institute of Internal Auditory Research Foundation.  Systems
Auditability and Control.  Altamonte Springs, FL, 1991.

National Research Council.  Computers at Risk:  Safe Computing in
the Information Age.  National Academy Press, Washington, DC,
1991.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems.  Paris, 1992

Privacy Working Group, Information Policy Committee, Information
Infrastructure Task Force.  Privacy and the National Information
Infrastructure:  Principles for Providing and Using Personal
Information.  June 6, 1995.

Swanson, Marianne and Barbara Guttman.  Generally Accepted
Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technology
Systems. Special Publication 800-14.  National Institute of
Standards and Technology, September 1996.  (available
electronically)
