     SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN COMPUTER SUPPORT AND OPERATIONS
Computer support and operations refers to everything done to run a computer
system.  This includes both system administration and tasks external to the
system that support its operation (e.g., maintaining documentation).  It
does not include system planning or design.  Support and operations are
routine activities that enable computer systems to function correctly.
These include fixing software or hardware problems, loading and maintaining
software, and helping users resolve problems. 

The support and operation of any computer system, from a three-person local
area network to a worldwide application serving thousands of users, is
critical to maintaining the security of a system.  This bulletin discusses
security issues in computer support and operations activities.

The failure to consider security as part of the support and operations of
computer systems is, for many organizations, their Achilles heel.  Computer
security system literature includes many examples of how organizations
undermined their often expensive security measures because of poor
documentation, old user accounts, conflicting software, or poor control of
maintenance accounts.  Also, an organization's policies and procedures
often fail to address many of these important issues.  The important
security considerations within some of the major categories of support and
operations are:

	 	user support, 
	 	software support,
	 	configuration management,
	 	backups,
	 	media controls,
	 	documentation, and
	 	maintenance. 

Some special considerations are noted for larger or smaller systems.  In
general, larger systems include mainframes, large minicomputers, and WANs.
Smaller systems include PCs and LANs.  

USER SUPPORT
In many organizations, user support takes place through a Help Desk.  Help
Desks can support an entire organization, a subunit, a specific system, or
a combination of these.  For smaller systems, the system administrator
normally provides direct user support.  Experienced users provide informal
user support on most systems.  User support should be closely linked to the
organization's incident handling capability.  In many cases, the same
personnel perform these functions.

An important security consideration for user support personnel is being
able to recognize which problems (brought to their attention by users) are
security- related.  For example, users' inability to log onto a computer
system may result from the disabling of their accounts due to too many
failed access attempts.  This could indicate the presence of hackers trying
to guess users' passwords.  

In general, system support and operations staff need to be able to identify
security problems, respond appropriately, and inform appropriate
individuals.  A wide range of possible security problems exist.  Some will
be internal to custom applications, while others apply to off-the-shelf
products.  Additionally, problems can be software- or hardware-based.
Small systems are especially susceptible to viruses, while networks are
particularly susceptible to hacker attacks, which can be targeted at
multiple systems.  System support personnel should be able to recognize
attacks and know how to respond.

The more responsive and knowledgeable system support and operation staff
personnel are, the less user support will be provided informally.  The
support other users provide is important, but they may not be aware of the
"whole picture."

SOFTWARE SUPPORT
Software is the heart of an organization's computer operations, whatever
the size and complexity of the system.  Therefore, it is essential that
software function correctly and be protected from corruption.  There are
many elements of software support.

One is controlling what software is used on a system.  If users or systems
personnel can load and execute any software on a system, the system is more
vulnerable to viruses, to unexpected software interactions, and to software
that may subvert or bypass security controls.  One method of controlling
software is to inspect or test software before it is loaded (e.g., to
determine compatibility with custom applications or identify other
unforeseen interactions).  This can apply to new software packages, to
upgrades, to off-the-shelf products, or to custom software, as deemed
appropriate.  In addition to controlling the loading and execution of new
software, organizations should also give care to the configuration and use
of powerful system utilities.  System utilities can compromise the
integrity of operating systems and logical access controls.

Viruses take advantage of the weak software controls in personal computers.
 Also, there are powerful utilities available for PCs that can restore
deleted files, find hidden files, and interface directly with PC hardware,
bypassing the operating system.  Some organizations use personal computers
without floppy drives in order to have better control over the system.
There are several widely available utilities that look for security
problems in both networks and the systems attached to them.  Some utilities
look for and try to exploit security vulnerabilities.

A second element in software support can be to ensure that software has not
been modified without proper authorization.  This involves the protection
of software and backup copies.  This can be done with a combination of
logical and physical access controls.  

Many organizations also include a program to ensure that software is
properly licensed, as required.  For example, an organization may audit
systems for illegal copies of copyrighted software.  This problem is
primarily associated with PCs and LANs, but can apply to any type of system.

CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
Closely related to software support is configuration management -- the
process of keeping track of changes to the system and, if needed, approving
them.  Configuration management normally addresses hardware, software,
networking, and other changes; it can be formal or informal.  The primary
security goal of configuration management is ensuring that changes to the
system do not unintentionally or unknowingly diminish security.  Some of
the methods discussed under software support, such as inspecting and
testing software changes, can be used.

For networked systems, configuration management should include external
connections.  Is the computer system connected?  To what other systems?  In
turn, to what systems are these systems and organizations connected?   Note
that the security goal is to know what changes occur, not to prevent
security from being changed.  There may be circumstances when security will
be reduced.  However, the decrease in security should be the result of a
decision based on all appropriate factors.

A second security goal of configuration management is ensuring that changes
to the system are reflected in other documentation, such as the contingency
plan.  If the change is major, it may be necessary to reanalyze some or all
of the security of the system. 

BACKUPS
Support and operations personnel and sometimes users back up software and
data.  This function is critical to contingency planning.  Frequency of
backups will depend upon how often data changes and how important those
changes are.  Program managers should be consulted to determine what backup
schedule is appropriate.  Also, as a safety measure, it is useful to test
that backup copies are actually usable.  Finally, backups should be stored
securely, as appropriate. 

Users of smaller systems are often responsible for their own backups.
However, in reality, they do not always perform backups regularly.  Some
organizations, therefore, task support personnel with making backups
periodically for smaller systems, either automatically (through server
software) or manually (by visiting each machine).

MEDIA CONTROLS 
Media controls include a variety of measures to provide physical and
environmental protection and accountability for tapes, diskettes,
printouts, and other media.  From a security perspective, media controls
should be designed to prevent the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or
availability of information, including data or software, when stored
outside the system.  This can include storage of information before it is
input to the system and after it is output.

The extent of media control depends upon many factors, including the type
of data, the quantity of media, and the nature of the user environment.
Physical and environmental protection is used to prevent unauthorized
individuals from accessing the media.  It also protects against such
factors as heat, cold, or harmful magnetic fields.  When necessary, logging
the use of individual media (e.g., a tape cartridge) provides detailed
accountability -- to hold authorized people responsible for their actions.  

Marking
Controlling media may require some form of physical labeling.  The labels
can be used to identify media with special handling instructions, to locate
needed information, or to log media (e.g., with serial/control numbers or
bar codes) to support accountability.  Identification is often by colored
labels on diskettes or tapes or banner pages on printouts.  

If labeling is used for special handling instructions, it is critical that
people be appropriately trained.  The marking of PC input and output is
generally the responsibility of the user, not the system support staff.
Marking backup diskettes can help prevent them from being accidentally
overwritten.

Logging
The logging of media is used to support accountability.  Logs can include
control numbers (or other tracking data), the times and dates of transfers,
names and signatures of individuals involved, and other relevant
information.  Periodic spot checks or audits may be conducted to determine
that no controlled items have been lost and that all are in the custody of
individuals named in control logs.  Automated media tracking systems may be
helpful for maintaining inventories of tape and disk libraries. 

Integrity Verification
When electronically stored information is read into a computer system, it
may be necessary to determine whether it has been read correctly or subject
to any modification.  The integrity of electronic information can be
verified using error detection and correction or, if intentional
modifications are a threat, cryptographic-based technologies.

Physical Access Protection
Media can be stolen, destroyed, replaced with a look-alike copy, or lost.
Physical access controls which can limit these problems include locked
doors, desks, file cabinets, or safes.  If the media requires protection at
all times, it may be necessary to actually output data to the media in a
secure location (e.g., printing to a printer in a locked room instead of to
a general-purpose printer in a common area).

Physical protection of media should be extended to backup copies stored
offsite.  They generally should be accorded an equivalent level of
protection to media containing the same information stored onsite.
(Equivalent protection does not mean that the security measures need to be
exactly the same.  The controls at the off-site location are quite likely
to be different from the controls at the regular site.)

Environmental Protection
Magnetic media, such as diskettes or magnetic tape, require environmental
protection, since they are sensitive to temperature, liquids, magnetism,
smoke, and dust.  Other media (e.g., paper and optical storage) may have
different sensitivities to environmental factors. 

Transmittal
Media control may be transferred both within the organization and to
outside elements.  Possibilities for securing such transmittal include
sealed and marked envelopes, authorized messenger or courier, or U.S.
certified or registered mail.

Disposition
When media is disposed of, it may be important to ensure that information
is not improperly disclosed.  This applies both to media that is external
to a computer system (such as a diskette) and to media inside a computer
system, such as a hard disk.  The process of removing information from
media is called sanitization.  (See the CSL Bulletin of October 1992,
Disposition of Sensitive Automated Information.)

Three techniques are commonly used for media sanitization: overwriting,
degaussing, and destruction.  Overwriting is an effective method for
clearing data from magnetic media.  As the name implies, overwriting uses a
program to write (1s, 0s, or a combination) onto the media.  Common
practice is to overwrite the media three times.  Overwriting should not be
confused with merely deleting the pointer to a file (which typically
happens when a delete command is used).  Overwriting requires that the
media be in working order.  Degaussing is a method to magnetically erase
data from magnetic media.  Two types of degausser exist: strong permanent
magnets and electric degaussers.  The final method of sanitization is
destruction of the media by shredding or burning.

Many people throw away old diskettes, believing that erasing the files on
the diskette has made the data unretrievable.  In reality, however, erasing
a file simply removes the pointer to that file.  The pointer tells the
computer where the file is physically stored.  Without this pointer, the
files will not appear on a directory listing.  This does not mean that the
file was removed.  Commonly available utility programs can often retrieve
information that is presumed deleted.

DOCUMENTATION
Documentation of all aspects of computer support and operations is
important to ensure continuity and consistency.  Formalizing operational
practices and procedures with sufficient detail helps to eliminate security
lapses and oversights, gives new personnel sufficiently detailed
instructions, and provides a quality assurance function to help ensure that
operations will be performed correctly and efficiently.  

The security of a system also needs to be documented.  This includes many
types of documentation, such as security plans, contingency plans, risk
analyses, and security policies and procedures.  Much of this information,
particularly risk and threat analyses, has to be protected against
unauthorized disclosure.  Security documentation also needs to be both
current and accessible.  Accessibility should take special factors into
account (such as the need to find the contingency plan during a disaster).

Security documentation should be designed to fulfill the needs of the
different types of people who use it.  For this reason, many organizations
separate documentation into policy and procedures.  A security procedures
manual should be written to inform various system users how to do their
jobs securely.  A security procedures manual for systems operations and
support staff may address a wide variety of technical and operational
concerns in considerable detail.  

MAINTENANCE 
System maintenance requires either physical or logical access to the
system.  Support and operations staff, hardware or software vendors, or
third-party service providers may maintain a system.  Maintenance may be
performed on site, or it may be necessary to move equipment to a repair
site.  Maintenance may also be performed remotely via communications
connections.  If someone who does not normally have access to the system
performs maintenance, then a security vulnerability is introduced.  

In some circumstances, it may be necessary to take additional precautions,
such as conducting background investigations of service personnel.
Supervision of maintenance personnel may prevent some problems, such as
"snooping around" the physical area.  However, once someone has access to
the system, it is very difficult for supervision to prevent damage done
through the maintenance process.

Many computer systems provide maintenance accounts.  These special log-in
accounts are normally preconfigured at the factory with pre-set, widely
known passwords.  One of the most common methods hackers use to break into
systems is through maintenance accounts that still have factory-set or
easily guessed passwords.  It is critical to change these passwords or
otherwise disable the accounts until they are needed.  Procedures should be
developed to ensure that only authorized maintenance personnel can use
these accounts.  If the account is to be used remotely, authentication of
the maintenance provider can be performed using call-back confirmation.
This helps ensure that remote diagnostic activities actually originate from
an established telephone number at the vendor's site.  Other techniques can
also help, including encryption and decryption of diagnostic
communications; strong identification and authentication techniques, such
as tokens; and remote disconnect verification.

Larger systems may have diagnostic ports.  In addition, manufacturers of
larger systems and third-party providers may offer more diagnostic and
support services.  It is critical to ensure that these ports are only used
by authorized personnel and cannot be accessed by hackers.

INTERDEPENDENCIES
Support and operations components coexist in most computer security controls.

Personnel.  Most support and operations staff have special access to the
system.  Some organizations conduct background checks on individuals
filling these positions to screen out possibly untrustworthy individuals.  

Incident Handling.  Support and operations may include an organization's
incident handling staff.  Even if they are separate organizations, they
need to work together to recognize and respond to incidents.

Contingency Planning.  Support and operations normally provides technical
input to contingency planning and carries out the activities of making
backups, updating documentation, and practicing responding to contingencies.

Security Awareness, Training, and Education.  Support and operations staff
should be trained in security procedures and should be aware of the
importance of security.  In addition, they provide technical expertise
needed to teach users how to secure their systems.

Physical and Environmental.  Support and operations staff often control the
immediate physical area around the computer system.  

Technical Controls.  The technical controls are installed, maintained, and
used by support and operations staff.  They create the user accounts, add
users to access control lists, review audit logs for unusual activity,
control bulk encryption over telecommunications links, and perform the
countless operational tasks needed to use technical controls effectively.
In addition, support and operations staff provide needed input to the
selection of controls based on their knowledge of system capabilities and
operational constraints.

Assurance.  Support and operations staff ensure that changes to a system do
not introduce security vulnerabilities by using assurance methods to
evaluate or test the changes and their effect on the system.  Operational
assurance is normally performed by support and operations staff.

COST CONSIDERATIONS
The cost of ensuring adequate security in day-to-day support and operations
is largely dependent upon the size and characteristics of the operating
environment and the nature of the processing being performed.  If
sufficient support personnel are already available, it is important that
they be trained in the security aspects of their assigned jobs; it is
usually not necessary to hire additional support and operations security
specialists.  Training, both initial and ongoing, is a cost of successfully
incorporating security measures into support and operations activities. 

Another cost is that associated with creating and updating documentation to
ensure that security concerns are appropriately reflected in support and
operations policies, procedures, and duties.

FOR MORE INFORMATION
This bulletin summarizes a chapter in NIST Special Publication 800-12,
Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST Handbook.  The handbook is
available electronically at: http://csrc.nist.gov/nistpubs/800-12 in
WordPerfect 6.1, MS Word,  and PostScript formats.  You can also order the
handbook from the Government Printing Office at (202) 512-1800, stock
number  SN003-003-03374- 0, price $18.00.


