INFORMATION SECURITY POLICIES FOR CHANGING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
ENVIRONMENTS

The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has issued a revised
comprehensive policy on computer security which provides a model
and structure useful to both the public and private sectors.  The
policy is contained in the revised OMB Circular A-130, Appendix
III, Security of Federal Automated Information.  The policy is
mandatory for executive branch agencies, but many other
government and private sector organizations may find its accepted
business practices useful in developing information security
practices in current and emerging information technology (IT)
environments. 

This bulletin highlights various aspects of the revised policy on
computer security and their implications. 

Individual Responsibility
The main thrust of the revised Circular A-130 is to drive
security responsibilities down to the users and managers of
computer systems and information.  Since computers and electronic
access are available to almost everyone, this approach is
necessary to address security in current information technology
environments.  Previous computer security policies and programs
have focused on securing data processing centers and large custom
applications. 

General Support Systems and Major Applications
To address computer security in today's environments, users and
managers need a framework which can handle a myriad of
technological possibilities.  A suggested structure offers two
categories:  general support systems and major applications.
General support systems include local area networks (LANs), wide
area networks (WANs), personal computers (PCs), workstations,
servers, networks and all manner of information technology
including data processing centers.  General support systems are
normally a collection of computers, networks, and other IT
components.  They can run a huge variety of commercial off-the-
shelf applications such as word processing, email, productivity
tools, databases, and custom applications, although any one
general support system may run only a few applications or many.
These routine applications are part of the general support
system.  The lines that separate general support systems from
each other are often managerial rather than physical or
electronic. 

A major application is a critical business or mission resource.
Although major applications are, like routine applications,
resident on general support systems, they need to be given
special management attention because of the organization's
reliance on them. In government organizations, a typical major
application is providing citizen benefits.  Agencies are most
able to identify their major applications.

OMB Circular A-130 does not distinguish between sensitive and
non-sensitive systems.  Rather, consistent with the Computer
Security Act of 1987, the Circular recognizes that systems are
procured and operated to serve particular agency needs of varying
sensitivity and criticality.  All general support systems contain
some sensitive information and, therefore, require protection,
including a security plan.  This should help prevent arguments
about what is sensitive and allow that energy to be spent
securing systems.

Responsibility, Plans, Review, and Authorization
In most organizations, it is appropriate to delegate decisions
about computer security to line managers and to retain agency-
level control of major applications.  The methodology for
managing computer security is based on four interrelated
management controls:  assigning responsibility for security,
security planning, periodic review of security controls, and
management authorization.  The goal of this process is to create
management accountability for security decisions and
implementation.  To be accountable for a decision, a manager
needs authority.

Although management controls are required for both general
support systems and major applications, significant differences
determine how they are implemented.  These are described below.

Assigning Responsibility.  Circular A-130 requires that a single
individual be assigned operational responsibility for security. 
The individual must be knowledgeable about the information
resources used and how to secure them.  For major applications,
the assigned individual must be able to give special management
attention to the security of the application.  By assigning a
knowledgeable security officer, management should receive better
security information which, in turn, should cause management to
want someone knowledgeable and skillful in security positions.

Security Planning.  Good security planning is essential, but it
must be more than simply the generation and review of paper.
Circular A-130 prescribes a series of specific planning
activities rather than a theoretical framework.  The activities
include the development of rules, security training, and the
implementation of other operational, management, and technical
controls.  Plans for major applications should be reviewed by the
manager of the primary support system which the application uses.

Review of Controls.  The security of a system or application
degrades over time, as the technology evolves and as staffing and
procedures change.  Organizations should use security reviews to
assure that management, operational, and technical controls are
appropriate and functioning effectively.  These review
requirements are much broader than the certification review
required under previous policies.  The security plan should be
the basis for the review (furthering the usefulness of the
security planning process).  For major applications, reviews must
include an independent review or audit.  (Independent audits can
be internal or external but should be performed by someone free
from personal and external constraints which could impair their
independence and should be organizationally independent.)

Authorization.  The authorization of a system to process
information, granted by a management official, provides an
important quality control.  By authorizing processing of a system
or application, a manager accepts the associated risk.  The
authorization, which some agencies refer to as an accreditation,
should be based on the review of controls.  The authorization of
major applications will generally occur at a very high managerial
level, either by a political appointee or a senior career federal
employee.

Rules
Under the revised policy, agencies are required to develop
security rules.  Rules are the same as system-specific policy.
They are the decisions made about security-related options and
required trade-offs, since all desired security objectives will
probably not be achievable.  The system-specific policy, stated
as operational rules, will have technical and operational
implications.  The requirement for rules is designed to force
people to address and document security-related decisions.  Some
of the types of issues for which rules are needed are:
     Are employees allowed to put work data on their home PCs?
     How often do passwords change?
     Who is allowed to have accounts on what computers?

Risk Management
Rules should be developed using a risk-based approach.  However,
a formal risk assessment is not required.  Organizations require
the flexibility to select decision-making processes which fit
their environments. 

The practical effect of this policy is that agencies no longer
need periodic risk assessments of their computer systems.
Agencies may still choose to perform a traditional risk
assessment, which remains a valuable tool.  Risk assessments are
most effective in areas where risks and safeguards can be
quantified or otherwise discretely measured or described. 

Many security personnel point out other benefits of traditional
risk analysis, especially the visibility to upper management
through system review and authorization.  Circular A-130 attempts
to keep these important benefits as a part of the authorization
of systems.

Personnel Controls
Since the greatest threat to most computer systems comes from
authorized users, agencies should institute personnel controls
such as least privilege, separation of duties, and individual
accountability.  This is a much broader view of personnel
security than in the old version, which only addressed personnel
screening.  Screening is required for personnel (such as system
or security administrators, emergency personnel, etc.) who can
bypass technical and operational controls and therefore may not
always be subject to other security controls such as least
privilege, separation of duties, or individual accountability.
This is, of course, a much smaller set of people and should
result in significant cost savings to agencies.

Incident Handling
Organizations need an incident handling capability, which is the
ability to detect and react quickly and efficiently to
disruptions in normal processing caused by malicious technical
threats.  Since information technology is so complex and widely
distributed and users are often unfamiliar with the technology,
an incident handling capability is imperative to provide security
support.  Many organizations do not currently have an ability to
handle or even to recognize computer security incidents.  The
development of an incident handling capability does not have to
involve a separate staff; it could be a service of a Help Desk
(with appropriate training).  Agencies are directed to share
information about common vulnerabilities so that the federal
government can improve its overall ability to respond to security
threats. 

Training
Like planning, training is an area of computer security which
receives more praise than action.  Users should be trained about
the specific general support systems or applications they use,
based on the system rules, specifically including how to handle
incidents.  This requirement cannot be met solely with
organization-wide training programs which address basic computer
security.  The training should use a media appropriate for the
audience and the risk.  Training need not be formal classroom
instruction; it could use interactive computer sessions or
well-written and understandable brochures.  Specialized training
of users is required for major applications.

Network Interconnectivity
Very few general support systems will exist as closed systems.
Most are networked to other organization systems and to external
public and private networks.  The gateways where networks meet
serve an important security role.  System rules in the "other"
network may be very different or enforced differently.  These
system interconnections should be explicitly approved by
organization managers. 

One important type of gateway is a firewall or secure gateway.
Secure gateways block or filter access between two networks,
often between a private network and a larger, more public network
such as the Internet.

Contingency Planning
Contingency planning is a vital element of a computer security
program.  Not only should contingency plans be developed, but
also they should be tested.  Federal agencies and private sector
organizations have been expanding the scope of their contingency
plans to include more than just large data centers.  The emphasis
is on assuring that all the resources needed for mission and
business critical functions will be available.  This includes
people, communications, support equipment, services, and many
other resources in addition to computing power.

Public Access
Federal agencies are encouraged to provide public access to
information.  Organizations should reduce their risks by
separating public access systems or records from agency internal
systems.

Assistance
The Circular provides for assistance to agencies in implementing
the revised policy.  NIST is tasked with helping agencies with
security planning, interconnectivity, incident handling,
training, and information sharing, as well as providing general
assistance.  The Department of Justice is tasked with helping
agencies with legal issues surrounding incidents.  The General
Services Administration is tasked with providing guidance on
including security in the acquisition process and providing or
making available security services.

Online Information
Information about OMB Circular A-130 and issues addressed in the
Circular is available online:

Guttman, Barbara and Edward Roback.  An Introduction to Computer
Security:  the NIST Handbook.  Special Publication 800-12.
(http://csrc.nist.gov/nistpubs/800-12.  The handbook is available
in postscript, WordPerfect, and Word.)

Office of Management and Budget.  OMB Circular A-130.  Management
of Federal Information Resources
(http://csrc.nist.gov/secplcy/a130.txt  This is the entire A-130
including Appendix III.)  The new Appendix contains two sections,
a policy section and an explanatory section which clarifies OMB's
intentions and provides implementation guidance. 

Security Issues in Public Access Systems.  CSL Bulletin.  May
1993. (http://csrc.nist.gov/nistbul/csl93-05.txt)

Wack, John and Lisa Carnahan.  Keeping Your Site Comfortably
Secure:  An Introduction to Internet Firewalls.  NIST Special
Publication 800-10.  (http://csrc.nist.gov/nistpubs/800-10/)

Computer Security Policy:  Setting the Stage for Success.  CSL
Bulletin.  January 1994.  (http://csrc.nist.gov/nistbul/csl94-
01.txt)

