ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD

NIST's Information Technology Laboratory has initiated a process
to develop a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) incorporating an Advanced
Encryption Algorithm (AEA).  To begin the process, draft minimum
acceptability requirements and draft criteria to evaluate
candidate algorithms were published for comment in the Federal
Register of January 2, 1997.  Also announced for comment were
draft submission requirements.  NIST has scheduled an open,
public workshop on the draft minimum acceptability requirements,
evaluation criteria, and submission requirements.  

It is intended that the AES will specify an unclassified,
publicly disclosed encryption algorithm capable of protecting
sensitive government information well into the next century. 
This bulletin describes the process of developing an AES and
invites comments from the public, manufacturers, voluntary
standards organizations, and federal, state, and local government
users so that their needs can be considered.

Background

To fulfill its responsibilities under the Computer Security Act
of 1987, the Information Technology Management Reform Act of
1996, Executive Order 13011, and OMB Circular A-130, NIST
develops standards and guidelines to ensure the protection of
sensitive, unclassified information processed in federal computer
systems.  NIST recognizes that many institutions, both within and
outside the federal government, have considerable investments in
their current installed base of encryption equipment implementing
the Data Encryption Algorithm, specified in FIPS 46-2, Data
Encryption Standard (DES).  

DES was first approved in 1977 and was most recently reaffirmed
by the Secretary of Commerce in 1993, until December 1998.  In
1993 the following statement was included in the standard:

      "At the next review (1998), the algorithm specified in this
      standard will be over twenty years old.  NIST will consider
      alternatives which offer a higher level of security.  One of
      these alternatives may be proposed as a replacement standard
      at the 1998 review."  

NIST foresees that a multi-year transition period will be
necessary to move toward any new encryption standard and that DES
will continue to be of sufficient strength for many applications. 
NIST plans to consult with all interested parties so that a
smooth transition can be accomplished. 

Encryption algorithms submitted for consideration as the AEA for
incorporation into the FIPS for AES will be reviewed on the basis
of evaluation criteria.  Comments on the draft criteria (and, at
the appropriate time, of candidate algorithms) from voluntary
consensus standards organizations are particularly encouraged.
  
Proposed Draft Minimum Acceptability Requirements and Evaluation
Criteria

The draft minimum acceptability requirements and evaluation
criteria are:

A.1  AES shall be publicly defined.

A.2  AES shall be a symmetric block cipher.

A.3  AES shall be designed so that the key length may be
      increased as needed. 

A.4  AES shall be implementable in both hardware and software. 

A.5  AES shall either be a) freely available or b) available
      under terms consistent with the American National Standards
      Institute (ANSI) patent policy.

A.6  Algorithms which meet the above requirements will be judged
      based on the following factors:

      a)  security (i.e., the effort required to cryptanalyze),

      b)  computational efficiency,
      
      c)  memory requirements,

      d)  hardware and software suitability,

      e)  simplicity,

      f)  flexibility, and
      
      g)  licensing requirements.

NIST is seeking comments on these draft minimum acceptability
criteria and evaluation criteria, suggestions for other criteria,
and relative importance of each individual criterion in the
evaluation process.  Criteria will be finalized by NIST following
the criteria workshop.  

Proposed Draft Submission Requirements

In order to provide for an orderly, fair, and timely evaluation
of candidate algorithm proposals, submission requirements will
specify the procedures and supporting documentation necessary to
submit a candidate algorithm.

B.1  A complete written specification of the algorithm including
      all necessary mathematical equations, tables, and parameters
      needed to implement the algorithm.

B.2  Software implementation and source code, in ANSI C code,
      which will compile on a personal computer.  This code will
      be used to compare software performance and memory
      requirements with respect to other algorithms.

B.3  Statement of estimated computational efficiency in hardware
      and software.

B.4  Encryption example mapping a specified plaintext value into
      ciphertext.

B.5  Statement of licensing requirements and patents which may be
      infringed by implementations of this algorithm.  

B.6  An analysis of the algorithm with respect to known attacks. 

B.7  Statement of advantages and limitations of the submitted
      algorithm.  

Since both the evaluation criteria and submission requirements
have not yet been set, candidate algorithms should NOT be
submitted at this time.

Comments

Comments on the proposed FIPS for AES must be received on or
before April 2, 1997.  Written comments should be sent to:

      Director, Information Technology Laboratory
      Attn:  FIPS for AES Comments
      Technology Building, Room A231
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      Gaithersburg, MD 20899 

Electronic comments may be sent to AES@nist.gov.  

Comments received in response to the Federal Register notice (on
which this ITL Bulletin is based) will be made part of the public
record and will be made available for inspection and copying in
the Central Records and Reference Inspection Facility, Room 6020,
Herbert C. Hoover Building, 14th Street between Pennsylvania and
Constitution Avenues, NW, Washington, DC, 20230.  

AES Workshop

The AES Evaluation Criteria/Submission Requirements Workshop will
be held on April 15, 1997, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.  Open to
the public, the workshop will be held in the Green Auditorium,
Administration Building, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland.  Copies of the comments
submitted will be available at the workshop.  

For planning purposes, advance registration is encouraged.  To
register, please fax your name, address, telephone, fax and e-
mail address to 301-948-1233 (Attn:  AES Criteria Workshop) by
April 10, 1997.  Registration will also be available at the door. 

For More Information

For general information on the AES and the planned workshop,
contact:

      Edward Roback
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      Building 820, Room 426
      Gaithersburg, MD 20899
      Telephone:  301-975-3696
      Fax:  301-948-1233
      Email:  edward.roback@nist.gov

Technical inquiries regarding the proposed draft evaluation
criteria and draft submission requirements should be addressed
to: 

      Miles Smid
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      Building 820, Room 426
      Gaithersburg, MD 20899
      Telephone:  301-975-2938
      Fax:  301-948-1233
      Email:  miles.smid@nist.gov


