Computer Attacks: What They Are and How to Defend Against Them

Introduction
Using malicious programs like WinNuke, Papa Smurf, and Teardrop, intruders invade 
our privacy and undermine the integrity of our computers. In the 1999 Computer Security 
Institute/FBI computer crime survey, fifty-seven percent of organizations cite their 
Internet connection as a "frequent point of attack."  Thirty percent reported that they had 
found actual intrusions into their networks and 26 percent reported theft of proprietary 
information.  The incident handling entity for the civilian government, FedCIRC, 
reported that 130,000 government sites totaling 1,100,000 hosts were subject to attacks in 
1998. Computer crime is substantial. It is clear that we must increase our efforts to secure 
our systems and mitigate crime in the relatively new medium of cyberspace.

In order to prevent attacks in cyberspace, systems administrators need a high-level 
understanding of the methods attackers use to penetrate computers. You cannot 
effectively fight a war without some knowledge of the weapons of your enemy. The 
Information Technology Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
researches the tricks of intruders and educates the public on how to stop them.  This 
bulletin:

( Presents an overview of hacker tools that penetrate computers;
( Classifies the various attacks that attackers use against networks;
( Statistically explores what kinds of computer attacks are being publicly published on 
the Internet;
( Lists the most popular attacks on the Internet today; and
( Discusses security solutions that can prevent the majority of publicly available 
computer attacks.

Overview of Attacker Tools
Vast resources are available on the Internet that enable intruders to penetrate computer 
networks. Detailed software vulnerability information is publicly discussed on 
newsgroups. Attacking tutorials are available that describe how to write automated 
programs that penetrate computers by taking advantage of these vulnerabilities. 
Thousands of automated software tools have been written that enable anyone to launch 
computer attacks. Computer attacks are no longer found on obscure pirate bulletin boards 
but rather on publicly available commercial Web sites whose sole purpose is to serve up 
this information. 

These computer attack programs are freely available to anyone on the Internet. Besides 
being available, these attacks are becoming easier to use. A few years ago, one had to 
have Unix to run an attack and had to know how to compile source code. Today, attacks 
with user-friendly graphical user interfaces (GUIs) that run on Windows hosts are 
available. Attack scripts are easy to use and dangerous. It is vital that systems 
administrators understand the danger these attacks pose and how to protect their networks 
against them. 

Classification of Computer Attacks
When we say "computer attack," we mean programs run by people to gain unauthorized 
control over a computer. These attacks take a variety of forms but generally fall in the 
following categories:

1. Remote Penetration: Programs that go out on the Internet (or network) and gain 
unauthorized control of a computer
2. Local Penetration: Programs that gain unauthorized access to the computer on which 
they are run
3. Remote Denial of Service: Programs that go out on the Internet (or network) and shut 
down another computer or a service provided by that computer
4. Local Denial of Service: Programs that shut down the computer on which they are run
5. Network Scanners: Programs that map out a network to figure out which computers 
and services are available to be exploited
6. Vulnerability Scanners: Programs that scour the Internet looking for computers 
vulnerable to a particular type of attack
7. Password Crackers: Programs that discover easy-to-guess passwords in encrypted 
password files. Computers can now guess passwords so quickly that many seemingly 
complex passwords can be guessed.
8. Sniffers: Programs that listen to network traffic. Often these programs have features to 
automatically extract usernames, passwords, or credit card information.

Statistical Sampling of Publicly Available Computer Attacks
In 1998, NIST categorized and analyzed 237 computer attacks that were published on the 
Internet out of an estimated 400 published attacks. This sample yielded the following 
statistics:

Statistic:	29% of attacks can launch from Windows hosts
Lesson:	One does not need to understand Unix to be dangerous anymore.  We are 
in an era of "point and click" attacks.

Statistic:	20% of attacks are able to remotely penetrate network elements (e.g., 
routers, switches, hosts, printers, and firewalls)
Lesson:	Attacks that give remote users access to hosts are not rare.

Statistic:	3% of the attacks enable Web sites to attack those who visited the site
Lesson: 	Surfing the Web is not a risk-free activity.

Statistic:	4% of attacks scan the Internet for vulnerable hosts
Lesson:	Automated scanning attack tools, which find easily compromised hosts, 
abound.  System administrators, with management concurrence or with professional 
assistance, should scan their own systems regularly before someone else does.

Statistic:	5% of attacks are effective against routers and firewalls
Lesson:	The Internet infrastructure components themselves are vulnerable to 
attack. (To the computer industry's credit, most attacks were denial of service and 
scanning and only a few were penetration attacks.)

The Most Popular Attacks on the Internet
In March 1999, the most popular attacks (or vulnerable applications) found by NIST were 
Sendmail, ICQ, Smurf, Teardrop, IMAP, Back Orifice, Netbus, WinNuke, and Nmap. 
These are discussed below.

1. Sendmail: Sendmail is an extremely old program that has had vulnerabilities 
throughout its history. Sendmail is proof that complex software is rarely completely 
patched because developers constantly add new features that introduce new 
vulnerabilities.  Recent attacks against sendmail fell into the categories of remote
penetration, local penetration, and remote denial of service.

2. ICQ: ICQ is a sophisticated chat program that stands for "I-Seek-You." It is currently 
owned by America Online and used by over 26 million users. In the past year, several 
ICQ attacks were developed that allowed one to impersonate other people and decrypt 
"encrypted" traffic. An attacker would use these attacks by going to a chat room and 
finding two people that are friends. The attacker then pretends to be someone's friend and 
sends them a Trojan horse (malicious code embedded into a legitimate program) via ICQ.

3. Smurf:  Smurf uses a network that accepts broadcast ping packets to flood the target 
with ping reply packets. Think of smurf as an amplifier allowing an attacker to 
anonymously flood a target with a huge amount of data.

4. Teardrop: Teardrop freezes vulnerable Windows 95 and Linux hosts by exploiting a 
bug in the fragmented packet re-assembly routines.

5. IMAP: The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) allows users to download their 
e-mail from a server. Last year, IMAP server software was released with a vulnerability 
that allows a remote attacker to gain complete control over the machine. This 
vulnerability is extremely important because a large number of mail servers use the 
vulnerable IMAP software.

6. Back Orifice: Back Orifice is a Trojan horse that allows a user to control remotely a 
Windows 95/98 host with an easy-to-use GUI.

7. Netbus: Netbus is similar to Back Orifice but it works against Windows NT as well as 
Windows 95/98.

8. WinNuke: WinNuke freezes a Windows 95 host by sending it out-of-band TCP data.

9. Nmap: Nmap is a sophisticated network-scanning tool. Among other features, nmap 
can scan using a variety of protocols, operate in stealth mode, and automatically identify 
remote operating systems.

How to Prevent the Majority of Computer Attacks
Protecting one's networks from computer attacks is an ongoing and non-trivial task; 
however, some simple security measures will stop the majority of network penetration 
attempts. For example, a well-configured firewall and an installed base of virus checkers 
will stop most computer attacks. Here, we present a list of 14 different security measures 
that, if implemented, will help secure a network.

1. Patching
Companies often release software patches in order to fix coding errors. Unfixed, these 
errors often allow an attacker to penetrate a computer system. Systems administrators 
should protect their most important systems by constantly applying the most recent 
patches.  However, it is difficult to patch all hosts in a network because patches are 
released at a very fast pace. Focus on patching the most important hosts and then 
implement the other security solutions mentioned below. Patches usually must be 
obtained from software vendors.

2. Virus Detection
Virus-checking programs are indispensable to any network security solution. Virus 
checkers monitor computers and look for malicious code. One problem with virus 
checkers is that one must install them on all computers for maximum effectiveness. It is 
time-consuming to install the software and requires updating monthly for maximum 
effectiveness.  Users can be trained to perform these updates but they can not be relied 
upon. In addition to the normal virus checking on each computer, we recommend that 
organizations scan e-mail attachments at the e-mail server. This way, the majority of 
viruses are stopped before ever reaching the users.

3. Firewalls
Firewalls are the single most important security solution for protecting one's network. 
Firewalls police the network traffic that enters and leaves a network. The firewall may 
outright disallow some traffic or may perform some sort of verification on other traffic. A 
well-configured firewall will stop the majority of publicly available computer attacks.

4. Password Crackers
Hackers often use little-known vulnerabilities in computers to steal encrypted password 
files. They then use password-cracking programs that can discover weak passwords 
within encrypted password files. Once a weak password is discovered, the attacker can 
enter the computer as a normal user and use a variety of tricks to gain complete control of 
your computer and your network. While used by intruders, such programs are invaluable 
to systems administrators.  Systems administrators should run password-cracking 
programs on their encrypted password files regularly to discover weak passwords.

5. Encryption
Attackers often break into networks by listening to network traffic at strategic locations 
and by parsing out clear text usernames and passwords. Thus, remote password-protected 
connections should be encrypted. This is especially true for remote connections over the 
Internet and connections to the most critical servers. A variety of commercial and free 
products are available to encrypt TCP/IP traffic.

6. Vulnerability Scanners
Vulnerability scanners are programs that scan a network looking for computers that are 
vulnerable to attacks. The scanners have a large database of vulnerabilities that they use 
to probe computers in order to determine the vulnerable ones. Both commercial and free 
vulnerability scanners exist.

7. Configuring Hosts for Security
Computers with newly installed operating systems are often vulnerable to attack. The 
reason is that an operating system's installation programs generally enable all available 
networking features. This allows an attacker to explore the many avenues of attack.  All 
unneeded network services should be turned off.

8. War Dialing
Users often bypass a site's network security schemes by allowing their computers to 
receive incoming telephone calls. The user enables a modem upon leaving work and then 
is able to dial in from home and use the corporate network. Attackers use war dialing 
programs to call a large number of telephone numbers looking for those computers 
allowed to receive telephone calls. Since users set up these computers themselves, they 
are often insecure and provide attackers a backdoor into the network. Systems 
administrators should regularly use war dialers to discover these back doors. Both 
commercial and free war dialers are readily available.

9. Security Advisories
Security advisories are warnings issued by incident response teams and vendors about 
recently discovered computer vulnerabilities.  Advisories usually cover only the most 
important threats and thus are low-volume and high-utility reading. They describe in 
general terms the threat and give very specific solutions on how to plug the vulnerability. 
Excellent security advisories are found from a variety of sources, but the most popular 
come from the Carnegie Mellon Emergency Response Team at http://www.cert.org.

10. Intrusion Detection
Intrusion detection systems detect computer attacks. They can be used outside of a 
network's firewall to see what kinds of attacks are being launched at a network. They can 
be used behind a network's firewall to discover attacks that penetrate the firewall.  They 
can be used within a network to monitor insider attacks.  Intrusion detection tools come 
with many different capabilities and functionality. For a paper on the uses and types of 
intrusion detection systems, see 
http://www.icsa.net/services/consortia/intrusion/educational_material.shtml.

11. Network Discovery Tools and Port Scanners
Network discovery tools and port scanners map out networks and identify the services 
running on each host. Attackers use these tools to find vulnerable hosts and network 
services. Systems administrators use these tools to monitor what host and network 
services are connected to their network. Weak or improperly configured services and 
hosts can be found and patched.

12. Incident Response Handling
Every network, no matter how secure, has some security events (even if just false 
alarms). Staff must know beforehand how to handle these events. Important points that 
must be resolved are: when should one call law enforcement, when should one call an 
emergency response team, when should network connections be severed, and what is the 
recovery plan if an important server is compromised? CERT provides general incident 
handling response capabilities for our nation (http://www.cert.org). FedCIRC is the 
incident response handling service for the civilian federal government 
(http://www.fedcirc.gov).

13. Security Policies
The strength of a network security scheme is only as strong as the weakest entry point. If 
different sites within an organization have different security policies, one site can be 
compromised by the insecurity of another. Organizations should write a security policy 
defining the level of protection that they expect to be uniformly implemented. The most 
important aspect of a policy is creating a uniform mandate on what traffic is allowed 
through the organization's firewalls. The policy should also define how and where 
security tools (e.g., intrusion detection or vulnerability scanners) should be used in the 
network. To obtain uniform security, the policy should define secure default 
configurations for different types of hosts.

14. Denial-of-Service Testing (for firewalls and Web servers)
Denial-of-service (DOS) attacks are very common on the Internet.  Malicious attackers 
shut down Web sites, reboot computers, or clog up networks with junk packets. DOS 
attacks can be very serious, especially when the attacker is clever enough to launch an 
ongoing, untraceable attack. Sites serious about security can launch these same attacks 
against themselves to determine how much damage can be done. We suggest that only 
very experienced systems administrators or vulnerability analysis consultants perform 
this type of analysis.

For More Information
More details on computer attacks can be found in the paper
"Understanding the Global Attack Toolkit Using a Database of Dependent Classifiers" at 
the URL:  http://www.itl.nist.gov/div893/staff/mell/pmhome.html

General computer security information:
NIST Computer Security Resource Clearinghouse: http://csrc.nist.gov
Federal Computer Incident Response Capability: http://www.fedcirc.gov 
Center for Education and Research in Information Assurance and Security: 
http://www.cerias.purdue.edu
Carnegie Mellon Emergency Response Team: http://www.cert.org

Disclaimer:  Any mention of commercial products or reference to commercial 
organizations is for information only; it does not imply NIST recommendation or 
endorsement.
