
REDUCING THE RISKS OF INTERNET CONNECTION AND USE

Note: The identification of specific commercial software products and
companies in this bulletin does not imply recommendation or
endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

The Internet is an international network of networks interconnecting
corporate and private enterprises, universities, government agencies,
and individuals.  Many see the Internet as a prototype for the
National Information Infrastructure (NII).  There are many benefits
from connecting to the Internet as evidenced by the fact that 100,000
new users are currently being added to the Internet each month.

Connection to the Internet provides users and organizations quick and
easy access to information, data, software, and discussion groups on
every subject imaginable.  Access to information on the Internet has
become easier and more efficient since the appearance of the mosaic
application.  This client application is used to access World Wide Web
(WWW) servers and gopher servers.  WWW servers and gopher servers are
rapidly becoming the predominant means for organizations to provide
multimedia information over the Internet.

In addition, the Internet is becoming an avenue for individuals and
organizations to engage in commerce.  The CommerceNet Consortium, a
coalition of organizations based in Silicon Valley, has recently
created CommerceNet, an Internet-based infrastructure for electronic
commerce.  The CommerceNet Consortium is a non-profit corporation
operating under matching funds provided by the Technology Reinvestment
Program (TRP) sponsored by the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA), NIST, the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Department of
Energy (DoE), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA).  CommerceNet participants include Intel, Sun Microsystems,
Pacific Bell, and Apple Computer.  The goal of CommerceNet is to
create a true electronic marketplace.

Connection to the Internet is accomplished in several different ways.
A user may obtain an account on a host connected to the Internet and
access Internet services by means of that host.  Through a commercial
service or an organization, a user may connect a personal computer
(PC) or a workstation directly to the Internet, that PC or workstation
becoming an Internet host with its own Internet address.  Finally, an
organization may connect its own network to the Internet and become a
network on the Internet referred to as an Internet subnet.

Internet users have different roles as a result of their type of
connection. End users are those users who have an account on an
Internet host.  Host administrators are those users who have PCs or
workstations which are Internet hosts. Internet hosts are one of two
types:

     o   client hosts, generally a DOS/Windows PC, which only access
         services on the Internet provided by other hosts; or

     o   server hosts, generally Unix PCs or workstations, which provide
         service on the Internet to other hosts but may also access
         services from other hosts.

Network administrators are those users who manage an Internet subnet.
Network administrators are often also host administrators, and both
network administrators and host administrators are end users as well.

While connection to the Internet provides many benefits for both
individuals and organizations, several security problems can occur
with Internet connection and use.  Fortunately, solutions are
available to make these security problems manageable.  This bulletin
cites some NIST solutions using cryptography, authentication
techniques, and incident response activities.

Forged E-mail

 At the top of an Internet e-mail message is a header which identifies
the sender of the message, the host from which the message was sent,
and the list of mail forwarding hosts through which the message
traveled from the sending host to the receiving host.  With normal
Internet mail, the information identifying the sender of the message
is easily forged.  The identification of the sending host and the path
that the message traveled through Internet e-mail forwarding hosts is
not so easily forged.  Nevertheless, this information may also be
unreliable.

An Internet e-mail message should always be checked at least to verify
that the sending host is the one from which mail from that sender
usually originates.  If not, the message should be considered suspect.
The only sure way to avoid the problem of forged e-mail on the
Internet is to use a digital signature such as Federal Information
Processing Standard (FIPS) 186, Digital Signature Standard (DSS).

Eavesdropping and Modification of Traffic

Whenever information is transmitted from one host to another on the
Internet, it usually passes through several, perhaps many, routers.
In addition, during its trip through the Internet, information may
pass through Internet subnets other than the ones on which the sending
and receiving hosts are located.  It is instructive to actually see
this.  From a user's host, the commands:

         ping -slRv <remote-host> or traceroute <remote-host> 

reveal the names and/or the Internet addresses of the routers through
which a message passes between the user's host and a remote host.
These routers may be routing the information over intermediate
subnets.  Usually these intermediate routers and subnets are not under
the control of either the sender of a message, the receiver of a
message, or the organization(s) to which the sender or receiver
belongs.

It is relatively easy for anyone with access to these intermediate
routers or subnets to eavesdrop and/or modify the passing information,
in particular, e-mail.  Consequently, when the transmission of
information requires confidentiality and/or integrity, it should be
protected when sent over the Internet.  FIPS 46-2, Data Encryption
Standard (DES), can be used to ensure the confidentiality of
information sent over the Internet.  FIPS 180, Secure Hash Standard,
can be used to ensure the integrity of information sent over the
Internet, i.e, to ensure that information sent arrives intact and
unmodified at its destination.

User Impersonation

The identification and authentication method most commonly used on the
Internet is a username/password mechanism.  When users log into an
Internet host providing login or file transfer service, they are
prompted for a username and a password.  If this username and password
is passed over the Internet (e.g., as in a telnet or an ftp), then it
is subject to eavesdropping.  Both the username and password are
transmitted in plaintext.  Intercepted usernames and passwords can be
used to impersonate the user on the login or file transfer server host
that the user was accessing.  Obtaining passwords by eavesdropping on
the Internet for the purpose of user impersonation is a frequent
occurrence.

While it is helpful to choose "good" passwords (see FIPS 112, Password
Usage, and FIPS 181, Automated Password Generator [APG]) and change
them often, within the Internet environment it is safer to use strong
user authentication techniques.  With one such technique, the user
typically carries a small (often credit card size) calculator.  After
providing a username to the login host, the user is presented with a
number which is entered into the calculator.  The calculator responds
with another number which is given to the login host.  As a result of
this exchange, the user is authenticated.  Systems based on this type
of authentication mechanism are available commercially.  The NIST
Advanced Smartcard Access Control System (NIST Smartcard) is an
example of this type of authentication mechanism.  The NIST Smartcard
system includes the capability of having a Smartcard reader/writer
permanently attached to a PC or a workstation so that the
challenge/response exchange takes place automatically.

Another strong authentication technique makes use of an ordered
sequence of passwords.  Each password is valid for only a single
login.  For each login, the host generates the next password in
sequence.  Users either make use of a small calculator or software on
their PC or workstation in order to obtain the next password.  When an
automated means of generating the next one-time password is
unavailable ( e.g., a user is away from the office), a list on paper
containing the next several one-time passwords may be carried.
Naturally, the user's username and name of the host are not contained
on the list.  One implementation of this mechanism is Secure Key
(S/Key) which may be adapted to different environments.  NIST is
adapting the S/Key method to use the Secure Hash Standard (FIPS 180).

The majority of hosts on the Internet are Unix hosts.  Many of these
hosts store the list of authorized users and the user's one-way
encrypted password in a file.  Unrestricted access to this file allows
for the possibility of user passwords being discovered which can lead
to user impersonation.  Host administrators should ensure that
encrypted passwords are not available to users of the host on which
the file is located or to other Internet users by using "shadow"
password files.

Unauthorized Host Access

Unauthorized host access refers to unauthorized access to a host's
resources including its processing capability and/or its files.
Unauthorized access almost always occurs on a server host which is
providing some service on the Internet regardless of the nature of the
service.  Unauthorized access to a host's files can result in
disclosure, modification, and/or destruction of data.  Often, access
to a host's files can lead to user impersonation. Unauthorized access
of a host's processing capability (i.e., the unauthorized initiation
of a process on the host) can lead to access of a host's files,
impairment of the host's processing ability, and unauthorized access
of other hosts.

While the number of ways unauthorized host access can be accomplished
is virtually endless (user impersonation is one example), several
steps can be taken to reduce the possibility. Among these are:

Deactivate unnecessary host services - If a server host is connected
to the Internet, the host administrator should activate only those
services designated to be provided on that host.  All others should be
deactivated.  In particular, if a client host is connected to the
Internet, the host administrator should deactivate all services on
that client host.

Ensure proper server host configuration - For the services to be
provided by a server host, the host administrator should be thorough
in understanding and using the configuration options for each service
in a manner consistent with the desired authorized access to the
service.

Keep host software current - As a result of the number of security
incidents on the Internet, a number of groups in the public and
private sectors have been created to help improve security on the
Internet.  Most of these groups have joined together to form the Forum
of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST).  NIST serves as the
secretariat for FIRST.  A number of FIRST teams monitor the security
problems of software used by Internet hosts and distribute vendor
updates to software which remove bugs that can create security
problems.  Host administrators should join Internet mailing lists
which provide notification of security problems with host
software. Host administrators should also update their host software
whenever an update is announced.

Monitor host configuration - Host administrators should at least
periodically run host configuration checking software on their hosts
to ensure that a proper host configuration is maintained. Such
software is available free on many Internet archives.

Perform frequent backups - In the event that unauthorized access to a
host should occur, host administrators should be able to access recent
backups of host software and data in order to be able to repair any
damage.

Use extreme caution in obtaining software over the Internet - One of
the advantages of an Internet connection is the easy availability of
free software.  However, such software may contain Trojan horses or
viruses.  Software should only be obtained from a source who is known
to ensure that the software they provide is of quality and free from
tampering.

Restrict traffic access to a subnet - When a network is connected to
the Internet, the network administrator should make use of a firewall
in order to restrict traffic to the subnet.  Access into and out of
the subnet through the firewall should be limited to only that
required in order to be consistent with services provided.  Strong
user authentication should usually be required for services provided
behind the Firewall, except perhaps, in the case of public access to
information.

Monitor host and network activity - Even the most rigorous prevention
measures are not guaranteed to protect users, hosts, and subnets from
harm.  Host administrators and network administrators must actively
monitor uses of their hosts and networks to be able to detect
suspicious behavior.

For more information

Publications

Jim Dray and David Balenson, An Overview of the Advanced Smart Card
Access Control System (ASACS), Workshop on Network and Distributed
System Security, pages 125-133, February 11-12, 1993.

John W. Verity, "Truck Lanes for the Info Highway," Business Week,
pages 112-114, April 18, 1994.

Paul Willich, "Wire Pirates," Scientific American, pages 90-101, March
1994.


Copies of all Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are
available from the National Technical Information Service (NTIS), 5285
Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161, (703) 487- 4650).

FIPS 112, Password Usage, May 30, 1985.  Order no. FIPSPUB 112.

FIPS 180, Secure Hash Standard (SHS), May 11, 1993.  Order no. FIPSPUB
180.

FIPS 181, Automated Password Generator (APG), October 5, 1993.  Order
number FIPSPUB 181.

FIPS 46-2, Data Encryption Standard (DES), December 30, 1993.  Order
number FIPSPUB 46-2.

FIPS 186, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), May 19 1994.  Order number
FIPSPUB 186.


Electronic access

CommerceNet.
         World Wide Web URL - http://www.commerce.net/.

FIPS 46-2, FIPS 180, FIPS 181, and FIPS 186 available from:
         World Wide Web URL -
         gopher://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov:71/11/nistpubs/fips46-2.txt.

         Last extension of command cites FIPS desired:

         /fips180.txt. or /fips181.txt. or /fips 186.txt
                                                           
CSL Bulletin, July 1993, Connecting to the Internet:  Security Considerations

         gopher://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov:71/00/nistbul/csl7-93.txt

Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams FIRST.
         World Wide Web URL - http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/.

Computer Emergency Response Team CERT.
         World Wide Web URL - ftp://ftp.cert.org/.

