CSL Bulletins Via E-Mail

We now offer the option of delivering your CSL Bulletins in ASCII
format directly to your e-mail address.  To subscribe to this service,
send an e-mail message to mailserv@nist.gov with the message subscribe
csl-bulletin.  For instructions on using mailserv, send a message to
mailserv@nist.gov with the message HELP.  Please note that if you
select this service (and we hope you do), you will no longer receive
the paper copy of the bulletin in the mail.


DIGITAL  SIGNATURE  STANDARD

To advance the use of electronic commerce in federal government and
other business transactions, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) issued Federal Information Processing Standard
(FIPS) 186, Digital Signature Standard (DSS) on May 19, 1994.  The
standard becomes effective December 1, 1994.  This CSL Bulletin
provides information about the standard, describes DSS applications,
discusses the public key infrastructure that NIST has proposed, and
comments on patent issues relating to the DSS.  The bulletin
supersedes the CSL Bulletin on the DSS dated January 1993 and the CSL
Fact Sheet on the DSS dated May 1994.

Background

To reduce costs and increase productivity, many federal government
agencies are transforming paper-based systems into automated
electronic systems.  This trend has created the need for a reliable,
cost- effective way to replace a handwritten signature with a digital
signature.  Like a handwritten signature, a digital signature can be
used to identify and authenticate the originator of the information.
A digital signature can also be used to verify that information has
not been altered after it is signed; this provides message integrity.
The DSS specifies a Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) for use in
computing and verifying digital signatures.

Cryptographic Integrity and the DSS

The DSS is based on public key cryptography which makes use of two
keys: a public key and a private key.  The two keys are mathematically
related, but the private key cannot be determined from the public key.
In a system implementing public key technology, each party has its own
public/private key pair.  The public key can be known by anyone;
however, no one should be able to modify it.  The private key is kept
secret.  Its use should be controlled by its owner and it should be
protected against modification as well as disclosure.

The DSS defines a public key cryptographic system for generating and
verifying digital signatures.  The private key is randomly generated.
Using this key and a mathematical process defined in the standard, the
public key is generated.  The DSS is used with FIPS 180, Secure Hash
Standard (SHS), to generate and verify digital signatures.  A proposed
revision to FIPS 180 will correct a technical flaw that made the
standard less secure than had been thought.  The algorithm is still
reliable as a security mechanism but the correction will return the
SHS to the original level of security.

To generate a signature on a message, the owner of the private key
first applies the Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA), as defined in the SHS,
to the message.  This action results in a condensed representation of
the message known as a message digest.  The owner of the private key
then applies the private key to the message digest using the
mathematical techniques specified in the DSA to produce a digital
signature.  Any party with access to the public key, message, and
signature can verify the signature using the DSA.  Public keys are
assumed to be known to the public in general.  If the signature
verifies correctly, the receiver (or any other party) has confidence
that the message was signed by the owner of the public key and the
message has not been altered after it was signed.

In addition, the verifier can provide the message, digital signature,
and signer's public key as evidence to a third party that the message
was, in fact, signed by the claimed signer.  Given the evidence, the
third party can also verify the signature.  This capability, an
inherent benefit of public key cryptography, is called non-
repudiation.  The DSS does not provide confidentiality for
information.  If confidentiality is required, the signer could first
apply the Data Encryption Standard (DES) to the message and then sign
it using the DSA.  FIPS 46-2, DES, defines a secret key algorithm to
be used by government agencies for encrypting unclassified federal
information in computer applications.

Applications of Digital Signatures

Because the DSA authenticates both the identity of the signer and the
integrity of the signed information, it can be used in a variety of
applications.  For example, the DSA could be utilized in an electronic
mail system.  After a party generated a message, that party could sign
it using the party's private key.  The signed message could then be
sent to a second party.  After verifying the received message, the
second party would have confidence that the message was signed by the
first party.  The second party would also know that the message was
not altered after the first party signed it.

In legal systems, it is often necessary to affix a time stamp to a
document in order to indicate the date and time at which the document
was executed or became effective.  An electronic time stamp could be
affixed to documents in electronic form and then signed using the DSA.
Applying the DSA to the document would protect and verify the
integrity of the document and its time stamp.


The DSA could also be employed in electronic funds transfer systems.
Suppose an electronic funds transfer message is generated to request
that $100.00 be transferred from one account to another.  If the
message was passed over an unprotected network, it may be possible for
an adversary to alter the message and request a transfer of $1000.00.
Without additional information, it would be difficult, if not
impossible, for the receiver to know the message had been altered.
However, if the DSA was used to sign the message before it was sent,
the receiver would know the message had been altered because it would
not verify correctly.  The transfer request could then be denied.

The DSA could be employed in a variety of business applications
requiring a replacement of handwritten signatures.  One example is
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI).  EDI is the computer-to-computer
interchange of messages representing business documents.  In the
federal government, this technology is being used to procure goods and
services.  Digital signatures could be used to replace handwritten
signatures in these EDI transactions.  For instance, contracts between
the government and its vendors could be negotiated electronically.  A
government procurement official could post an electronically signed
message requesting bids for office supplies.  Vendors wishing to
respond to the request may first verify the message before they
respond.  This action assures that the contents of the message have
not been altered and that the request was signed by a legitimate
procurement official.


After verifying the bid request, the vendor could generate and sign an
electronic bid.  Upon receiving the bid, the procurement official
could verify that the vendor's bid was not altered after it was
signed.  If the bid is accepted, the electronic message could be
passed to a contracting office to negotiate the final terms of the
contract.  The final contract could be digitally signed by both the
contracting office and the vendor.  If a dispute arose at some later
time, the contents of the contract and the associated signatures could
be verified by a third party.

The DSA could also be useful in the distribution of software.  A
digital signature could be applied to software after it has been
validated and approved for distribution.  Before installing the
software on a computer, the signature could be verified to be sure no
unauthorized changes (such as the addition of a virus) have been made.
The digital signature could be verified periodically to ensure the
integrity of the software.

In database applications, the integrity of information stored in the
database is often essential.  The DSA could be employed in a variety
of database applications to provide integrity.  For example,
information could be signed when it was entered into the database.  To
maintain integrity, the system could also require that all updates or
modifications to the information be signed.  Before signed information
was viewed by a user, the signature could be verified.  If the
signature verified correctly, the user would know the information had
not been altered by an unauthorized party.  The system could also
include signatures in the audit information to provide a record of
users who modified the information.

These examples show how the DSA can be used in a variety of
applications to improve the integrity of both data and the
application.  NIST anticipates that federal agencies will incorporate
the DSS into a variety of automated electronic systems that require
message integrity and non-repudiation.

Security Provided by the DSS

The security provided by any public key cryptographic system depends
on several factors.  Some important considerations are the
mathematical soundness of the algorithm, the management of keys, and
the implementation of the system in an application.  The safety of the
DSA is dependent on the work needed to find or compute the discrete
logarithm of a very large number.  Mathematicians and computer
scientists have been working to find a simple solution to the problem
of finding logarithms for a long time.  To date, only incremental
improvements in computation have been attained through the use of more
powerful computers.  It is important to understand that an adversary,
who does not know the private parameters of a party, cannot generate
the party's signature.  Therefore, a digital signature cannot be
forged.

Digital signatures offer protection not available by alternative
signature techniques.  One such alternative is a digitized signature.
A digitized signature is generated by converting a visual form of a
handwritten signature to an electronic image.  Although a digitized
signature resembles its handwritten counterpart, it does not provide
the same protection as a digital signature.  Digitized signatures can
be forged.  They can also be duplicated and appended to other
electronic data.  Digitized signatures cannot be used to determine if
information has been altered after it is signed.

Supporting Functions 

Functions needed to support the use of the DSS include:
 
o      The SHS is required to generate a message digest.  A message
       digest is a condensed representation of the information to be
       signed.  Using the SHS (as revised), it is computationally
       infeasible to find a message which corresponds to a given
       message digest, or to find two different messages which will
       produce the same message digest.

o      To use the DSS, a party must be able to generate random numbers
       to produce the public/private key pair and to compute the
       signature.  Random numbers can be generated either by a true
       noise hardware randomizer or by using a pseudorandom number
       generator.  One approved pseudorandom number generator is the
       key generation methodology found in Appendix C of the ANSI
       X9.17, "Financial Institution Key Management (Wholesale)."

o      A means of associating public and private key pairs to the
       corresponding users is required.  That is, there must be a
       binding of a user's identity and the user's public key.  This
       binding may be certified by a mutually trusted party.  For
       example, a certifying authority could sign credentials
       containing a user's public key and identity to form a
       certificate.

Public Key Infrastructure

To develop a public key infrastructure (PKI) which will associate
public and private key pairs and ensure the integrity of the delivery
and storage of public keys, NIST contracted with the MITRE Corporation
to study the options for the automated management of public keys and
public key certificates in both national and international arenas.
Following the study's recommendations, NIST proposed a pilot PKI to
gain valuable experience in public key management in a few selected
federal agencies.  The results of the pilot project will be used to
help plan an operational PKI.

Patent Issues

On July 27, 1993, NIST obtained U.S. Patent 5,231,668 which describes
the DSA, the algorithm which authenticates the integrity of signed
data and the identity of the signer.  NIST is also seeking foreign
patents.  The DSA patent and any foreign counterparts that may issue
are available for use without any written permission from or any
payment of royalties to the U.S.  government.

During the comment period, one of the issues raised was whether the
DSS would infringe privately held patents.  In particular, Public Key
Partners (PKP), a patent licensing company in Sunnyvale, California,
asserted that four of its U.S. patents (4,200,770, 4,218,582,
4,405,829 and 4,424,414), which relate to public key cryptographic
systems and methods, cover DSS.  U.S. Patents 4,200,770, 4,405,829 and
4,424,414 are owned by Stanford University and U.S. Patent 4,218,582
is owned by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).  Similarly,
Claus P.  Schnorr of the Goethe University in Frankfurt, Germany
maintained that the DSS would infringe his U.S. Patent 4,995,082 on a
method for verifying signatures in a data exchange system.  The
Schnorr patent was subsequently assigned to PKP.  There are foreign
counterpart patents or applications to some of these U.S. patents.

NIST reviewed all of the asserted patents and concluded that none of
them would be infringed by DSS.  Extra protections will be written
into the PKI pilot project that will prevent an organization or
individual from suing anyone except the government for patent
infringement in the course of the project.  The PKI pilot project will
contain an "Authorization and Consent" clause under which the
government assumes liability for any patent infringement resulting
from the performance of the project, including use by private parties
when communicating with the U.S. government.

The Stanford and MIT patents were developed under funding from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) under which the Government received
a "nonexclusive, nontransferable, paid-up license to make, use, and
sell the invention throughout the world by or on behalf of the
Government of the United States and states and domestic municipal
governments."  The Government has other rights in the Stanford patents
under Stanford's Institutional Patent Agreement with NSF.  There is no
record of any Government license under the Schnorr patent.

Applicability of the DSS

FIPS 186, DSS, is the governmentwide standard for use by all federal
agencies including defense agencies which require a public key
cryptographic signature system for unclassified information.  In
addition, NIST has been informed by Department of Defense authorities
that the DSS may be used to sign unclassified information processed by
"Warner Amendment" systems (10 U.S.C. 2315 and 44 U.S.C.  3502[2]) and
classified data in selected applications.

The General Accounting Office (GAO) has also issued a decision
regarding the use of electronic signatures to create valid contractual
obligations which can be recorded as consistent with 31 U.S.C. 1501.
Under Comptroller General Decision B-245714, the GAO has concluded
that "Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) systems using message
authentication codes which follow NIST's FIPS 113, Computer Data
Authentication (which uses the DES to provide message integrity), or
digital signatures following NIST's FIPS 186, Digital Signature
Standard, can produce a form of evidence that is acceptable under
section 1501."

Information on CSL Publications, including NIST Publications List 91,
Computer Security Publications, is available from:

Computer Systems Laboratory
Room B151, Technology Building
National Institute of Standards and
Technology
Gaithersburg, MD  20899-0001
Telephone:  (301) 975-2821
Fax:  (301) 948-1784
E-mail:  dward@enh.nist.gov

FIPS are available from:

National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA  22161
Telephone:  (703) 487-4650

Copies of "American National Standard for Financial Institution Key
Management (Wholesale)," ANSI X9.17, can be purchased from:

Washington Publishing Company, 
P.O. Box 203, Chardon, OH 44024-0203,
telephone (800) 334-4912.


