PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE TECHNOLOGY 

As business transactions are automated, information technology security
services based on cryptography become essential.  Public key cryptography
can play an important role in providing needed security services including
confidentiality, authentication, digital signatures, and integrity.  Public
key cryptography uses two electronic keys:  a public key and a private key.
 These keys are mathematically related but the private key cannot be
determined from the public key.  The public key can be known by anyone
while the private key is kept secret by its owner.  

As long as there is strong binding between the owner and the owner’s public
key, the identity of the originator of a message can be traced to the owner
of the private key.  A Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) provides the means
to bind public keys to their owners and helps in the distribution of
reliable public keys in large heterogeneous networks.  Public keys are
bound to their owners by public key certificates.  These certificates
contain information such as the owner’s name and the associated public key
and are issued by a reliable Certification Authority (CA).  This bulletin
describes PKI technology and discusses implementation issues.

Basic Components of a PKI

Public Key Certificate - An electronic record that binds a public key to
the identity of the owner of a public-private key pair and is signed by a
trusted entity.   

Certificate Revocation List (CRL) - A list of certificates that have been
revoked.  The list is usually signed by the same entity that issued the
certificates.  Certificates can be revoked for several reasons.  For
example, a certificate can be revoked if the owner’s private key has been
lost or if the owner’s name changes. 

Certification Authority (CA) - A trusted entity that issues and revokes
public key certificates and certificate revocation lists.  

Registration Authority (RA) - An entity that is trusted by the CA to
register or vouch for the identity of users to a CA.
 
Certificate Repository - An electronic site that holds certificates and
CRLs.  CAs post certificates and CRLs to repositories.

Certificate User - An entity that uses certificates to know, with
certainty, the public key of another entity.

Digital Signatures and PKI

The widespread use of PKI technology to support digital signatures can help
increase confidence of electronic transactions.  For example, the use of a
digital signature allows a seller to prove that goods or services were
requested by a buyer and therefore demand payment.  The use of a PKI allows
parties without prior knowledge of each other to engage in verifiable
transactions.

For example, a buyer interested in purchasing widgets for company A
electronically would need to obtain a public key certificate from a
Certification Authority (CA).  In one possible scenario, the buyer would
generate a public-private key pair, provide a Registration Authority (RA)
with a valid photo-id, and ask for a certificate.  The RA would verify the
buyer’s identity based on the photo-id and vouch for the identity of the
buyer to a CA, who would then issue the certificate.  

The newly certified buyer can now sign electronic purchase orders for
widgets.  The widget vendor receiving the purchase order can obtain the
buyer’s certificate and the certificate revocation list (CRL) for the CA
that issued the buyer’s certificate, check that the certificate has not
been revoked, and verify the buyer’s signature.  By verifying the validity
of the certificate, the vendor ensures receipt of a  valid public key for
the buyer; by verifying the signature on the purchase order, the vendor
ensures the order was not altered after the buyer issued it.  

Once the validity of the certificate and the signature are established, the
vendor can ship the requested widgets to company A with the knowledge that
their buyer ordered the widgets.  This transaction can occur without any
prior business relationships between the buyer and the seller.
Potentially, a user’s private-public key pair can be used for multiple
applications.  For example, the same key used to sign the purchase order
could be used by the buyer to authenticate an electronic payment to the
vendor through the buyer’s bank.

Most of the processing in the above example can occur automatically
depending of the application.  After obtaining a certificate, perhaps a
click on an icon is all it takes for a user to sign a message.  Similarly,
the verification process on the receiver’s end would occur as a message is
received without requiring much intervention from the person receiving the
message.

Confidentiality and PKI 

A PKI could also support confidentiality services, using a public-private
key pair that is different from the one used for signing.  In this case,
users need to obtain a separate certificate for the confidentiality public
key.  To send an encrypted message, a user could obtain the recipient’s
confidentiality certificate from a certificate repository and verify that
it is valid.  Then the sender can encrypt the message using the public key.
 Only the recipient, in possession of the private key, will be able to
decrypt the message.

Certificates

Although there have been several proposed formats for public key
certificates, most certificates available today are based on an
international standard (ITU-T X.509 version 3). This standard defines a
certificate structure that includes several optional extensions.  The use
of X.509v3 certificates is important because it provides interoperability
between PKI components.  Also, the standard’s defined extensions offer
flexibility to support specific business needs.

PKI Architectures

A PKI is often composed of many CAs linked by trust paths.  The CAs may be
linked in several ways.  They may be arranged hierarchically under a "root
CA" that issues certificates to subordinate CAs.  The CAs can also be
arranged independently in a network.  Recipients of a signed message with
no relationship with the CA that issued the certificate for the sender of
the message can still validate the sender’s certificate by finding a path
between their CA and the one that issued the sender’s certificate.  The
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed a
hybrid architecture specification based on both a hierarchical and a
network architecture model in the document, Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
Technical Specifications (Version 2.3): Part C - Concept of Operations.    

Implementation Issues 

Many issues must be considered when developing and using PKI technology.
Some of these important issues are discussed below.

Interoperability  

To be useful in a global sense, PKI components need to interoperate
regardless of the source of the equipment and the software involved.  As
part of its efforts to further the development of PKI technology, NIST has
produced a Minimum Interoperability Specification of PKI Components
[MISPC].  The MISPC was produced in cooperation with ten industry partners
through Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs) and
provides a basis for interoperable PKI components from different vendors.
The goal of this specification is to further interoperability among
heterogeneous public key certificate management systems, thus providing
security services to users in large communities.

The MISPC specifies a minimal set of features, transactions, and data
formats for the various certificate management components that make up a
PKI.  The specification addresses certificate generation, renewal, and
revocation; certificate validation; signature generation and verification;
and other related issues.

Security  

It is important to consider the integrity and security of the PKI
components.  The confidence that can be placed on the binding between a
public key and its owner depends much on the confidence that can be placed
on the system that issued the certificate that binds them.  Provisions in
the X.509 standard enable the identification of policies that indicate the
strength of mechanisms used and the do’s and don’ts of certificate
handling.  The rules expressed by certificate policies are reflected in
certification practice statements (CPSs) that detail the operational rules
and system features of CAs and other PKI components.  By examining the
policy associated with a sender’s certificate, the recipient of a signed or
encrypted message can determine whether the binding between the sender and
the sender’s key is acceptable and thus accept or reject the message.  By
examining a CA’s CPS, users can determine whether to obtain certificates
from it, based on their security requirements.  Other CAs can also use the
CPS to determine if they want to cross-certify with that CA.

To aid organizations interested in contracting CA services or implementing
their own CA, NIST is producing a Security Baseline document.  The Baseline
should help to establish sound operational practices and provide criteria
for evaluating service and equipment offerings that provide appropriate
security functionality and system integrity.

Performance

One of the main challenges in the development of PKIs is the handling of
revocation information.  For very large communities, where the number of
revocations at any given time could be large, the propagation of CRLs can
prove to be the source of heavy network traffic, high processing loads, and
heightened storage requirements.  The handling of revocation poses some
interesting technical challenges and a number of alternatives to X.509 and
CRL processing are being developed.

Advances in PKI Technology

Several organizations are working to develop PKI technology. Included here
are some prominent activities.  The U.S. Federal Government Information
Technology Services (GITS) board has established a Federal PKI Steering
Committee to provide guidance to federal agencies regarding the
establishment of a Federal PKI 
(http://gits-sec.dyniet.com/fpki.htm).  The Federal PKI Steering Committee
sanctions approximately fifty PKI-related pilots throughout the federal
government.  The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) PKIX Working Group
(http://www.ietf.cnri.reston.va.us/) and the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) X9F Working Group (http://www.x9.org/) are developing
standards based on the use of X.509 v3 certificates.  In addition, the
OpenGroup’s Security Program Group is developing an architecture for PKI
(http://www.rdg.opengroup.org/public/tech/security/pki).

Contact Information

For more detailed information about NIST’s PKI Program , see the web site
at the following URL:  http://csrc.nist.gov/pki/ or contact Donna F. Dodson
at 301-975-2921, ddodson@nist.gov. 

 References 

[CONOPS]	Public Key Infrastructure Technical Specification: Part C -
Concept of Operations, William E. Burr. Available from
http://csrc.nist.gov/pki.
[COR95]	ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 21, Technical Corrigendum 2 to ISO/IEC 9594-8 :
1990 & 1993 (1995:E), July 1995.
[CSL94-11]	NIST CSL Bulletin, Digital Signature Standard, November 1994.
[DAM]	ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 21, Draft Amendments DAM 4 to ISO/IEC 9594-2, DAM 2
to ISO/IEC 9594-6, DAM 1 to ISO/IEC 9594-7, and DAM 1 to ISO/IEC 9594-8 on
Certificate Extensions, June 30, 1996.
[MISPC]	Minimum Interoperability Specification for PKI Components,  W.
Burr, D. Dodson, N. Nazario, W.T. Polk,  Available from
http://csrc.nist.gov/pki.
[PKIX1]	Internet Draft, Internet Public Key Infrastructure Part I:  X.509
Certificate and CRL Profile, R Housley, W. Ford and D. Solo, June 1996.
Working draft "in progress" available at:
ftp://ds.internic.net/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-pkix-ipki-part1-02.txt.
[PKIX3]	Internet Draft, Internet Public Key Infrastructure Part III:
Certificate Management Protocols, S. Farrell, C. Adams and W. Ford, June
1996. working draft "in progress" available at:
ftp://ds.internic.net/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-pkix-ipki3cmp-00.txt.
[X9.55]	Draft American National Standard X9.55-1995, Public Key
Cryptography for the Financial Services Industry: Extensions to Public Key
Certificates and Certificate Revocation Lists, Nov. 11, 1995.
[X9.57] 	Working Draft American National Standard X9.57-199x, Public Key
Cryptography for the Financial Services Industry: Certificate Management,
June 21, 1996.


