INTERNET ELECTRONIC MAIL
Electronic mail (email) is one of the most popular uses of the Internet.  With 
access to Internet email, one can potentially correspond with any one of 
millions of people worldwide.  Proprietary email systems can be gatewayed to 
Internet email, which expands the connectivity of email manyfold.  This bulletin 
summarizes a chapter of the draft Internet Security Policy:  A Technical Guide 
(http://csrc.nist.gov/isptg) which NIST plans to publish next year.  Trusted 
Information Systems, Inc. is a contributor to that draft document including the 
material in this bulletin.

Organizational Email Policy
Electronic mail is increasingly critical to the normal conduct of business.  
Organizations need policies for email to help employees use electronic mail 
properly, to reduce the risk of intentional or inadvertent misuse, and to assure 
that official records transferred via electronic mail are properly handled.  
Organizational polices are needed to establish general guidance in such areas 
as:
- the use of email to conduct official business,
- the use of email for personal business,
- access control and confidential protection of messages, and
- the management and retention of email messages.

In addition to one-to-one communication, email can support email address lists, 
so that a single individual or organization can send email to a list of 
addresses of individuals or organizations.  Email-based discussion groups are 
another use of email lists.  Participants send email to a central mailing list 
server, and the messages are broadcast to the other participants.  This allows 
subscribers, who may be in different time zones or different continents, to have 
useful disscussions.  USENET newsgroups are an elaboration of the email 
discussion group.

Email Protocols
The principal Internet email protocols (not including proprietary protocols 
which are tunneled or gatewayed to the Internet) are:
- SMTP (Simple Mail Transport Protocol) - a host-to-host email protocol.  An 
SMTP server accepts email messages from other systems and stores them for the 
addressees.
- POP (Post Office Protocol) - the most popular email retrieval protocol.  A POP 
server allows a POP client to download email that has been received via another 
email server.
- IMAP (Internet Mail Access Protocol) - a newer and less popular email 
retrieval protocol.  IMAP is more convenient for reading email while traveling 
than POP, since the messages can be left on the server, without having to keep 
the local list and server list of read email messages in sync.
 MIME stands for Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions; it redefines the format 
of email messages.  It can be used to support security features like digital 
signatures and encrypted messages.  But MIME also has been used to mail virus-
infected executables and dangerous messages and attachments.

Potential Email Problems

Accidents
It is easy to have email accidents.  An email message can be sent instantly with 
no hope of retrieval.  A single keystroke or mouse-click can misroute the 
message.  Email messages may be archived for years, so that an ill-considered 
remark can return to haunt the sender later.  Email folders can grow until the 
email system crashes.  Misconfigured discussion group software can send messages 
to the wrong groups.  Errors in email lists can flood the subscribers with 
hundreds of error messages.  Sometimes error messages will bounce back and forth 
between email servers, multiplying until they crash the servers.  When an 
organization’s internal email system is connected to the Internet, the effect of 
accidents can be increased a thousandfold.
Ways to prevent accidents include:
- train users what to do when things go wrong, as well as how to do it right,
- configure email software so that the default behavior is the safest behavior, 
and
- use software that follows Internet email protocols and conventions rigorously.  

Personal Use
Since email is usually provided as an organizational tool, like a telephone, 
facsimile machine, or photocopier, non-business use would normally be limited or 
forbidden (depending on the organization).  While it is tempting to simply state 
that all use of email must be for business purposes only, it is generally 
recognized that this type of policy is difficult to enforce.  It is more 
effective to define policy that places clear limits on personal use of email, in 
the same manner as personal use limits are defined for telephones and fax 
machines.
Note that sending email from the organization’s address is like sending a letter 
on company letterhead, using the company’s postage meter.  If senders use their 
company account to send email to an email discussion list, it may appear as 
though the company endorses whatever opinions the sender put in their last 
message.

Marketing
When the major online services gatewayed their email systems to the Internet, 
suddenly there was a convenient means to reach a large affluent audience.  
Unsolicited direct email marketing on the Internet was born.  Since the cost of 
sending email is nominal compared to paper mail, there is little incentive to be 
selective about the list of addresses sent to, the size of the message, or the 
frequency of the mailings.  There is a bill in the U.S. Congress to put direct 
email marketing under rules similar to those for bulk mail, so that email 
marketers would be required to keep lists of addresses which do not wish to 
receive mailings.

Email Threats
 The most common Internet email transfer protocols (SMTP, POP3, IMAP4) do not 
typically include provisions for reliable authentication as part of the core 
protocol, allowing email messages to be easily forged.  Nor do these protocols 
require the use of encryption which could ensure the privacy of email messages.  
Although extensions to these basic protocols exist, the decision to use them 
needs to be established as part of the mail server administration policy.  Some 
of the extensions use a previously established means of authentication while 
others allow the client and server to negotiate a type of authentication that is 
supported by both ends.

Dangerous Attachments
An attacker can attach files to email messages that contain Trojan executables, 
virus-infected files, or documents that contain dangerous macros.

Impersonation
The sender address on Internet email cannot be trusted, since the sender can 
create a false return address, or the header could have been modified in 
transit, or the sender could have connected directly to the SMTP port on the 
target machine to enter the email.

Eavesdropping
Email headers and contents are transmitted in the clear.  As 
a result, the contents of a message can be read or altered 
in transit.  The header can be modified to hide or change 
the sender, or to redirect the message.

Mailbombing
Mailbombing is an email-based attack.  The attacked system is flooded with email 
until it fails.  A system will fail in different ways, depending on the type of 
server and how it is configured.  Some Internet service providers (ISPs) give 
temporary accounts to anyone who signs up for a trial subscription, and those 
accounts can be used to launch email attacks.

Junk and Harassing Email
Since anyone in the world can send you email, it can be difficult to stop 
someone from sending it to you.  People can get your address from company email 
directories, subscriber lists, or USENET postings.  If you give your email 
address to any Web site, they can resell your address to junk mailers.  Some Web 
browsers volunteer your email address when you visit a Web site.  Most mail 
systems have some provision for filtering email, that is, searching the email 
header or body for particular words or patterns, and then filing or deleting the 
email.  However, many users don’t know how to use the filtering mechanism.  
Also, client-side filtering usually takes place only after the email has been 
received or downloaded, so large messages or large numbers of messages can’t be 
discarded.  There are several bills in Congress to restrict junk email.

Email Safeguards

Preventing Dangerous Content
Attachments to email messages or the messages themselves can be scanned for 
executables, viruses, macros, etc.  However, not all dangerous content can be 
detected or prevented.  Depending on the ingenuity of the attacker and the 
gullibility of the recipient, dangerous content can still be hidden or encrypted 
in an email message.  Users should be warned to treat unusual email messages the 
same way they treat unusual parcels, with all due caution.
 
Preventing Modification and Impersonation
Email messages are the electronic equivalent to a postcard written in pencil.  
Anyone along the way can alter or forge a message.  Digital signatures can be 
used to authenticate the sender of a message and to protect the integrity of its 
contents.  A digital signature is a string of digits produced by cryptographic 
algorithms that is transmitted with the message.  Digital signature methods 
generally use a one-way hash or message digest algorithm to detect changes in 
the contents of a message, and a cryptographic algorithm to protect the hash.  A 
message digest is a relatively short string of digits that corresponds to the 
longer message.  A good message digest algorithm makes it computationally 
infeasible to create a message with different content but the same digest value.
Various cryptographic algorithms may be used to protect the message digest.  For 
example, Federal Information Processing 
Standard (FIPS) 46-2, the Data Encryption Standard (DES), could be used to 
encrypt the message digest, but the sender and receiver would need to already 
have a secret key in common.  On the other hand, using public key encryption and 
a public repository of public keys allows strangers to securely exchange email 
(depending on the trustworthiness of the repository).  FIPS 186, Digital 
Signature Standard (DSS), and FIPS 180-1, Secure Hash Standard, provide guidance 
on cryptographic techniques for federal government applications requiring 
authentication of email messages using public key cryptography.  Most commercial 
secure Internet email systems support both the FIPS algorithms and those of RSA 
Data Security, whose patented public key encryption and message digest  
algorithms are in widespread use.
Unfortunately, although standards exist for the cryptographic algorithms and the 
means for exchanging keys, the infrastructure for trustworthy public 
repositories is still under development.  Organizations and networks of 
organizations can still create key exchange infrastructures for their own use 
now using commercial products.

Preventing Eavesdropping
Eavesdropping can be prevented by encrypting the contents of the message or the 
channel over which it is transmitted.  In a typical email system, where mail is 
sent and received via a central server, if just the channel is encrypted, system 
administrators at the sending or receiving ends could still read or alter the 
messages.  To provide the highest degree of confidentiality, either a secure 
channel must be used from sender desktop to receiver desktop or the contents of 
the message must be encrypted.
Various Internet email encryption schemes have been proposed, but none has 
reached a critical mass of use.  Most use a symmetric or secret key cipher to 
encrypt the contents of the message.  This requires that the sender and receiver 
already have a secret key distribution mechanism in place.  Other encryption 
methods use public key encryption to encrypt a secret one-time session key that 
is used to encrypt the contents of the message.  The receiver then uses their 
private key to decrypt the session key, and that is used to decrypt the message.  
Semi-automated encryption add-on software is available for most popular email 
packages.

Levels of Protection of Electronic Mail
The protection provided for electronic mail messages, systems, and software 
should be consistent with the value of the information that will be transmitted 
over networks.  In general, there should be centralized control of electronic 
mail services.  Policies should be defined to specify the level of protection to 
be implemented.  The following guidelines may be helpful, but are not intended 
to be rigid categories.
Low
User
- Use of electronic mail services for purposes constituting clear conflict of 
COMPANY interests or in violation of company information security policies is 
expressly prohibited, as is excessive personal use of email.
- Use of COMPANY email to participate in chain letters or moonlighting is not 
acceptable.
- The COMPANY provides electronic mail to employees for business purposes.  
Limited personal use is acceptable as long as it doesn’t hurt the COMPANY.
- The use of email in any way to facilitate the conduct of a private commercial 
purpose is forbidden.
Manager
- Use of electronic mail services for purposes constituting clear conflict of 
COMPANY interests or in violation of company information security policies is 
expressly prohibited, as is excessive personal use of email.
- All employees must read and sign the email user policy.
- Email address directories can be made available for public access.
- If the COMPANY provides access to electronic mail to external users such as 
consultants, temporary employees, or partners, they must read and sign the email 
policy statement.
- The contents of email messages will be considered confidential, except in the 
case of criminal investigations.
Technical
- The POP server will be configured to accept plaintext passwords from local 
machines.
Medium
User
- Electronic mail is provided by the COMPANY for employees to conduct COMPANY 
business.  The use of email for personal business is not allowed. 
- Confidential or company proprietary information will not be sent by email. 
- Only authorized email software may be used.
- Anonymous remailer software cannot be installed.
- Employees may not use anonymous remailers for any purpose.
Manager
- Confidential or company proprietary information will not be sent by email.
- Employees found to be deliberately misusing email will be disciplined 
appropriately.
Technical
- The email system will provide a single externally accessible email address for 
employees.  The address will not contain the name of internal systems or groups.
- Only approved SMTP servers and configuration files will be installed.
- The SMTP servers will be configured to reject attempts to forward email from 
non-COMPANY senders to non-COMPANY addresses via COMPANY mail servers.
- A local archive of approved MIME-compatible viewers will be maintained and 
made available for internal use.
High
User
- Electronic mail is provided by the COMPANY for employees to conduct COMPANY 
business.  No personal use is allowed. 
- All electronic messages created and stored on COMPANY computers or networks 
are property of the COMPANY and are not considered private.
- The COMPANY retains the right to access employee electronic mail if it has 
reasonable grounds to do so.  The contents of electronic mail will not be 
accessed or disclosed other than for security purposes or as required by law.
- Users must not allow anyone else to send email using their accounts.  This 
includes their supervisors, secretaries, and assistants.
- The COMPANY reserves the right to review all employee email communications.  
Email messages may be retrieved by the COMPANY even though they have been 
deleted by the sender and the reader.  Such messages may be used in disciplinary 
actions.
Manager
- Directories of employee email addresses will not be made available for public 
access.
- If confidential or proprietary information must be sent via email, it must be 
encrypted so that it is only readable by the intended recipient using COMPANY-
approved software and algorithms.
- No visitors, contractors, or temporary employees may use COMPANY email.
- Encryption shall be used for any information designated sensitive or 
confidential that will be transmitted over open networks such as the Internet.
- Outbound messages will be spot-checked to ensure that this policy is being 
followed.
Technical
- Incoming messages will be scanned for viruses and other dangerous content.
- Email servers shall be configured to refuse email addressed to non-COMPANY 
systems.
- Email server logs files will be scanned for unapproved versions of email 
client software, and the systems will be corrected.
- Email clients will be configured so that every message is signed using the 
digital signature of the sender.
Email Retention Policy for Federal Agencies
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) has issued standards for 
the management of federal records created or received on electronic mail.  These 
standards require agencies to manage such records in accordance with the 
provisions of the chapter pertaining to adequacy of documentation, record 
keeping requirements, agency record management responsibilities, and records 
disposition (36 CFR parts 1220,1222, and 1228).  For more information, visit the 
NARA Web site at gopher://gopher.nara.gov:70/00/about/cfr.records/1222.txt.

Additional Resources
For more information on email security, consult the list of resources listed in 
Appendix 1 of the Internet Security Policy:  A Technical Guide 
(http://csrc.nist.gov/isptg).

*Reference to specific commercial products or brands is for information purposes 
only; no endorsement or recommendation by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, explicit or implicit, is intended or implied.

