                               CSL BULLETIN
               Advising users on computer systems technology
                               November 1992

SENSITIVITY OF INFORMATION

This CSL Bulletin discusses issues related to sensitive
information and clarifies the meaning of "sensitivity" as applied
to agency information systems.  It draws upon several years of
NIST's experience in assisting federal agencies to implement the
Computer Security Act of 1987 and the visits to senior agency
officials by personnel from NIST, the National Security Agency,
and the Office of Management and Budget.  

NIST believes that it is more important to provide appropriate
protection to agency information technology (IT) systems than to
determine whether or not a "sensitive" label should be applied to
particular information or IT systems.       

Sensitivity and the Computer Security Act of 1987
The Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-235) was enacted to
create "a means for establishing minimum acceptable security
practices" for federal unclassified computer systems.  The Act
also emphasizes that federal information requires protection
against unauthorized modification or destruction, as well as
unauthorized disclosure.  An improved level of security is
obtained by the determination of protection requirements and the
selection of cost-effective security controls to meet those
requirements. 

To distinguish systems covered by P.L. 100-235 from those used to
process national security information, the law uses the term
"sensitive."  Confusion over this term may have led some agencies
to focus their limited computer security resources on determining
which systems would be labelled "sensitive."   

NIST believes that the Computer Security Act did not intend to
create two governmentwide categories of information: "sensitive"
and "non-sensitive."  Likewise, we believe the Act did not create
a category of "non-sensitive systems" that could be operated
without regard for security.  All systems must include security
controls that reflect the true importance of the information
processed on the system and/or the government investment embodied
in the components of the information system.    

Definition
Many people think that sensitive information only requires
protection from unauthorized disclosure.  However, the Computer
Security Act provides a much broader definition of the term
"sensitive" information: 

     any information, the loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to
     or modification of which could adversely affect the national
     interest or the conduct of federal programs, or the privacy
     to which individuals are entitled under section 552a of
     title 5, United States Code (the Privacy Act), but which has
     not been specifically authorized under criteria established
     by an Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept
     secret in the interest of national defense or foreign
     policy.  

The above definition can be contrasted with the long-standing
confidentiality-based information classification system for
national security information (i.e., CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET, and
TOP SECRET).  This system is based only upon the need to protect
classified information from unauthorized disclosure;  the U.S.
Government does not have a similar governmentwide system for
unclassified information.  No governmentwide schemes exist which
are based on the need to protect the integrity or availability of
information. 

The Computer Security Act did not alter the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA); therefore, an agency's determination of
sensitivity under this definition does not change the status of
releasability under the FOIA.

Agency Determination of "Sensitive"
Interpretation of the Computer Security Act's definition of
sensitive is, ultimately, an agency responsibility.  Typically,
protecting sensitive information means providing for one or more
of the following:
 
     Confidentiality  - Disclosure of the information must be
     restricted to designated parties.

     Integrity - The information must be protected from errors or
     unauthorized modification.

     Availability - The information must be available within some
     given timeframe (i.e., protected against destruction).  

Many in the computer security community, including NIST, argue
that all non-trivial agency information requires some level of
protection along at least one of these dimensions
(confidentiality, integrity, and availability).  

Agencies should determine what protection is required for each
agency IT system and how such protection can best be realized in
a cost-effective manner.  Information "owners," not system
operators, should determine what protection their information
requires.  The type and amount of protection needed depends on
the nature of the information and the environment in which it is
processed.  The controls to be used will depend on the risk and
magnitude of the harm resulting from the loss, misuse, or
unauthorized access to or modification of the information
contained in the system.

In determining appropriate protection measures, it is important
to bear in mind that requirements for the protection of a 
particular type of information are often provided by statute or
agency determination.  Information required to be protected under
statute includes, for example, privacy information (protected
under the Privacy Act), financial information (protected under
the Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act), taxpayer
information, and individual census data.  In other cases, an
agency may determine protection requirements for a specific type
of information.  For example, some individual agencies have
created internal "Limited Official Use" or "For Official Use
Only" designations for certain types of unclassified information
having confidentiality requirements.  In either case, however,
the selection of specific security controls is usually left to
the agency's or the individual user's discretion.    

Risk-Based Selection of Security Controls and Minimum Protective
Measures
Information owners should use a risk-based approach to determine
what harm may result if a system is inadequately protected.  The
potential for harm as well as consideration of the cost of
protective measures must be analyzed together.  It makes no sense
to spend more on protective measures than the potential for harm
if integrity, confidentiality, or availability requirements are
not achieved.  This approach should provide appropriate
protection that is cost-effective for agencies.

As appropriate, the selection of security measures may also be
undertaken across-the-board at an agency.  This begins by
examining the agency's operating environment and the typical
minimum protection requirements of the information processed by
its IT systems.  In many cases, it may then be possible to
justify the establishment of minimal security controls for the
majority of agency systems.  Such an approach can often prove
cost-effective and result in basic controls being built into
systems as a matter of routine.  Procurements may also be
simplified as a result, since the same controls are being
specified for each purchase.

Perceptions of Protection Requirements
Perceptions of the need to protect particular information can
vary markedly.  It is important for the owners of information to
inform others who may access or process information on their
behalf as to necessary protection requirements for the
information.  For example, if agency elements use a central
system for running large applications, the perception of the need
to protect the data may vary widely between the application
manager and the system operator.  However, while individual
perceptions may vary, ultimately the risk and the magnitude of
potential harm to the organization remain unchanged.  This
highlights the need for application managers and other "owners"
of data to set data protection requirements for those processing
or accessing the information.  "Owners" requirements to protect
information can be more effectively met when complemented by the
presence of the agency's computer security policy and computer
security training and awareness program.  Informing employees of
the many ways and needs to protect information can lead to a
higher degree of cooperation in meeting protection requirements. 

Summary
The intent of the Computer Security Act is to assure adequate
protection of federal IT systems.  NIST believes that all non-
trivial agency information requires some degree of protection to
provide confidentiality, integrity, or availability.  Therefore,
agencies must determine the protection requirements for all their
information and apply an appropriate level of protection. 
Agencies should be selecting and implementing appropriate cost-
effective security controls for all their systems.  

References

Office of Management and Budget, Appendix III, "Security of
Federal Automated Information Systems," to Office of Management
and Budget Circular A-130, "Management of Federal Information
Resources," December 12, 1985.

National Bureau of Standards, Federal Information Processing
Standard Publication 65, Guideline for Automatic Data Processing
Risk Analysis, August 1979.  Available from the National
Technical Information Service (NTIS), 5285 Port Royal Road,
Springfield, VA 22161, order number FIPSPUB 65.

NIST Special Publication 500-170, Management Guide to the
Protection of Information, October 1989.  Available from the
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402, order
number SN003-003-02968-8.

NIST Special Publication 500-174, Guide for Selecting Automated
Risk Analysis Tools, October 1989.  Available from NTIS, 5285
Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161, order number PB90-148784.

NIST Publication List 91, Computer Security Publications,
available from CSL Publications, NIST, Technology Building, Room
B151, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

