GUIDE FOR DEVELOPING SECURITY PLANS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS
Today's rapidly changing technical environment requires federal agencies to 
adopt a minimum set of management controls to protect vital information 
technology (IT) resources.  These management controls are directed at individual 
IT users in order to reflect the distributed nature of today's technology.  
Technical and operational controls support management controls.  To be 
effective, all of these controls must interrelate.

The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology recently published Special Publication 800-18, Guide 
for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology Systems.  Developed by 
Marianne Swanson and a working group of the Federal Computer Security Program 
Managers' Forum, the publication addresses the development of security plans 
that document the management, technical, and operational controls for federal 
automated information systems.  The publication provides guidance for 
individuals responsible for IT security at the system level and at the 
organization level.  It is written specifically for individuals with little or 
no computer security expertise.  The document can also be used as an auditing 
tool by auditors, managers, and IT security officers.  The concepts presented 
are generic and can be applied to organizations in private and public sectors.  
This ITL Bulletin summarizes the purpose, responsibilities, format, and 
development of an effective security plan (the guide provides detailed 
information).

Background
The completion of system security plans is a requirement of the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, "Management of Federal Information 
Resources," Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated Information Resources," 
updated in 1996, and of Public Law 100-235, "Computer Security Act of 1987."  
OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, does not distinguish between sensitive and 
non-sensitive systems.  Rather, consistent with the Computer Security Act of 
1987, the Circular recognizes that federal automated information systems have 
varied sensitivity and criticality.  All federal systems have some level of 
sensitivity and require protection as part of good management practice.  OMB 
Bulletin 90-08, dated July 9, 1990, which provided initial security planning 
guidance, is superseded by the issuance of Special Publication 800-18.  The 
generic term "system" is used in the document to mean either a major application 
or a general support system.

Major Application or General Support System Plans
All applications and systems must be covered by system security plans if they 
are categorized as a "major application" or  "general support system."  Specific 
security plans for other applications are not required because the security 
controls for those applications or systems would be provided by the general 
support systems in which they operate.  For example, a department-wide Financial 
Management System would be a major application requiring its own security plan.  
A local program designed to track expenditures against an office budget might 
not be considered a major application and would be covered by a general support 
system security plan for an office automation system or a local area network 
(LAN).  Standard commercial off-the-shelf software (such as word processing 
software, electronic mail software, utility software, or other general- purpose 
software) would not typically be considered a major application and would be 
covered by the plans for the general support system on which they are installed.

Purposes of System Security Plans

* Provide an overview of the security requirements of the system and describe 
the controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements; and 

* Delineate responsibilities and expected behavior of all individuals who access 
the system.

Security Plan Responsibilities
The system owner is responsible for ensuring that the security plan is prepared 
and for implementing the plan and monitoring its effectiveness.  Security plans 
should reflect input from various individuals with responsibilities concerning 
the system, including functional "end users," information owners, the system 
administrator, and the system security manager.

Agencies may require contractor compliance with the guide as a contract 
requirement.  A security plan in the format specified in the document or in 
another agreed-upon format is suggested in those cases where vendors are 
operating a system under contract to the federal government.  In those instances 
where a contractor or other entity (e.g., state or local government) operates a 
system that supports a federal function, a security plan is required.

OMB Circular A-130 requires a summary of the security plan to be incorporated 
into the strategic IRM plan required by the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 
Chapter 35).

Agencies should develop policy on the security planning process.  Security plans 
are living documents that require periodic reviews, modifications, and milestone 
or completion dates for planned controls.  Procedures should be in place 
outlining who reviews the plans and follows up on planned controls.  In 
addition, procedures are needed describing how security plans will be used in 
the authorization for processing process.

Recommended Format
While the format in Special Publication 800-18 is recommended, it is recognized 
that some agencies have developed plans using other formats that meet A-130 
requirements.  The document is intended as guidance only and should not be 
construed as the only format allowed.  A standardized approach, however, not 
only makes the development of the plan easier by providing examples, but also 
provides a baseline to review plans. The level of detail included within the 
plan should be consistent with the criticality and value of the system to the 
organization's mission (i.e., a more detailed plan is required for systems 
critical to the organization's mission).  The security plan should fully 
identify and describe the controls currently in place or planned for the system 
and should include a list of rules of behavior (see Appendices A and B of the 
document).

System Analysis
Once completed, a security plan will contain technical information about the 
system, its security requirements, and the controls implemented to provide 
protection against its risks and vulnerabilities.  Before the plan can be 
developed, a determination must be made as to which type of plan is required for 
a system.  An analysis of the system determines the boundaries of the system and 
the type of system.

System Boundaries
Defining what constitutes a "system" for the purposes of the guideline requires 
an analysis of system boundaries and organizational responsibilities.  
Constructing logical boundaries around a set of processes, communications, 
storage, and related resources, as defined by the guideline, identifies a 
system. The elements within these boundaries constitute a single system 
requiring a security plan.  Each element of the system must:

* Be under the same direct management control;

* Have the same function or mission objective;

* Have essentially the same operating characteristics and security needs; and

* Reside in the same general operating environment.

All components of a system need not be physically connected (e.g., a group of 
stand-alone personal computers (PCs) in an office; a group of PCs placed in 
employees' homes under defined telecommuting program rules; a group of portable 
PCs provided to employees who require mobile computing capability for their 
jobs; and a system with multiple identical configurations that are installed in 
locations with the same environmental and physical safeguards).

Multiple Similar Systems
An organization may have systems that differ only in the responsible 
organization or the physical environment in which they are located (e.g., air 
traffic control systems).  In such instances, it is appropriate and recommended 
to use plans that are identical except for those areas of difference.  This 
approach provides consistent levels of protection for similar systems.

System Category
The next step is to categorize each system as either a "major application" or as 
a "general support system."  All applications should be covered by a security 
plan.  The applications will either be covered individually if they have been 
designated as a major application or within the security plan of a general 
support system.  A system may be designated as a major application even though 
it is also supported by a system that has been designated as a general support 
system.  For example, a LAN may be designated a general support system and have 
a security plan.  The organization's accounting system may be designated as a 
major application even though the computing and communication resources of the 
LAN support it.  In this example, the major application requires additional 
security requirements due to the sensitivity of the information the application 
processes. When a security plan is required for a major application that is 
supported by a general support system, coordination of both plans is required.

* Major Applications
All federal applications have value and require some level of protection.  
Certain applications, because of the information they contain, process, or 
transmit or because of their criticality to the organization's missions, require 
special management oversight.  These applications are major applications.

Agencies are expected to exercise management judgment in determining which of 
their applications is a major application and to ensure that the security 
requirements of non-major applications are discussed as part of the security 
plan for the applicable general support systems.

Major applications are systems that perform clearly defined functions for which 
there are readily identifiable security considerations and needs (e.g., an 
electronic funds transfer system).  A major application might comprise many 
individual programs and hardware, software, and telecommunications components.  
These components can be a single software application or a combination of 
hardware/software focused on supporting a specific mission-related function.  A 
major application may also consist of multiple individual applications if all 
are related to a single mission function (e.g., payroll or personnel).  If a 
system is defined as a major application and the application is run on another 
organization's general support system:

* Notify the system owner that the application is critical or contains sensitive 
information and provide specific security requirements;

* Provide a copy of the major application's security plan to the operator of the 
general support system;

* Request a copy of the system security plan of the general support system and 
ensure it provides adequate protection for the application and information; and

* Include a reference to the general support system security plan, including the 
unique name/identifier information.


* General Support System 
A general support system is interconnected information resources under the same 
direct management control that shares common functionality.  A general support 
system normally includes hardware, software, information, data, applications, 
communications, facilities, and people and provides support for a variety of 
users and/or applications. A general support system, for example, can be a:

	- LAN including smart terminals that supports a branch office;

	- Backbone (e.g., agency-wide);

	- Communications network;

	- Departmental data processing center including its operating system and 
	  utilities;

	- Tactical radio network; or

	- Shared information processing service organization.

A major application can run on a general support system.  The general support 
system plan should reference the major application plan(s).

Plan Development for All Systems
All security plans, at a minimum, should be marked, handled, and controlled to 
the level of sensitivity determined by organizational policy. In addition, all 
security plans should be dated for ease of tracking modifications and approvals.  
Dating each page of a security plan may be appropriate if updates are to be made 
through change pages. Both types of plans must contain general descriptive 
information regarding who is responsible for the system, the purpose of the 
system, and the sensitivity level of the system.

System Identification

* System Name/Title
The plan begins with listing the name and title of the system/application.  Each 
system/application should be assigned a unique name/identifier.  Assigning a 
unique identifier to each system helps to ensure that appropriate security 
requirements are met based on the unique requirements for the system, and that 
allocated resources are appropriately applied.  Further, the use of unique 
system identifiers is integral to the IT system investment models and analyses 
established under the requirements of the Information Technology Management 
Reform Act of 1996 (also known as the Clinger-Cohen Act).  The identifier could 
be a combination of alphabetic and numeric characters and can be used in 
combination with the system/application name.  The unique name/identifier should 
remain the same throughout the life of the system to allow the organization to 
track completion of security requirements over time.

* Responsible Organization
List the federal organizational sub-component responsible for the system.  If a 
state or local government or contractor performs the function, identify both the 
federal and other organization and describe the relationship.  Be specific about 
the organization and do not abbreviate.  Include physical locations and 
addresses.

* Information Contact(s)
List the name, title, organization, and telephone number of one or more persons 
designated to be the point(s) of contact for this system.  One of the contacts 
given should be identified as the system owner.  The designated persons should 
have sufficient knowledge of the system to be able to provide additional 
information or points of contact, as needed.

* Assignment of Security Responsibility
An individual must be assigned responsibility in writing to ensure that the 
application or general support system has adequate security.  To be effective, 
this individual must be knowledgeable of the management, operational, and 
technical controls used to protect the system.  Include the name, title, and 
telephone number of the individual who has been assigned responsibility for the 
security of the system.

System Operational Status
Indicate one or more of the following for the system's operational status.  If 
more than one status is selected, list which part of the system is covered under 
each status.

- Operational - the system is operating.

- Under development  - the system is being designed, developed, or implemented.

- Undergoing a major modification - the system is undergoing a major conversion 
  or transition.

If the system is under development or undergoing a major modification, provide 
information about the methods used to assure that up-front security requirements 
are included.  Include specific controls in the appropriate sections of the plan 
depending on where the system is in the security life cycle.

General Description/Purpose
Present a brief description (one-three paragraphs) of the function and purpose 
of the system (e.g., economic indicator, network support for an organization, 
business census data analysis, crop-reporting support).

If the system is a general support system, list all applications supported by 
the general support system.  Specify if the application is or is not a major 
application and include unique name/identifiers, where applicable.  Describe 
each application's function and the information processed.  Include a list of 
user organizations, whether they are internal or external to the system owner's 
organization, and a general description of the type of information and 
processing provided.  Request information from the application owners (and a 
copy of the security plans for major applications) to ensure their requirements 
are met.

System Environment
Provide a brief (one-three paragraphs) general description of the technical 
system.  Include any environmental or technical factors that raise special 
security concerns, such as:

- The system is connected to the Internet;

- It is located in a harsh or overseas environment;

- Software is rapidly implemented;

* The software resides on an open network used by the general public or with 
overseas access;

- The application is processed at a facility outside of the organization's 
  control; or

- The general support mainframe has dial-up lines.

Describe the primary computing platform(s) used (e.g., mainframe, desk top, LAN 
or Wide Area Network (WAN).  Include a general description of the principal 
system components, including hardware, software, and communications resources.  
Discuss the type of communications included (e.g., dedicated circuits, dial 
circuits, public data/voice networks, Internet).  Describe controls used to 
protect communication lines in the appropriate sections of the security plan.

Include any security software protecting the system and information.  Describe 
in general terms the type of security protection provided (e.g., access control 
to the computing platform and stored files at the operating system level or 
access to data records within an application).   Include only controls that have 
been implemented or are planned, rather than listing the controls that are 
available in the software.  Controls that are available, but not implemented, 
provide no protection.

System Interconnection/Information Sharing
System interconnection is the direct connection of systems for the purpose of 
sharing information resources.  System interconnection, if not appropriately 
protected, may result in a compromise of all connected systems and the data they 
store, process, or transmit. It is important that system operators, information 
owners, and management obtain as much information as possible about the 
vulnerabilities associated with system interconnection and information sharing 
and the increased controls required to mitigate those vulnerabilities.   The 
security plan for the systems often serves as a mechanism to effect this 
security information exchange and allows management to make informed decisions 
regarding risk reduction and acceptance.

OMB Circular A-130 requires that written management authorization (often in the 
form of a Memorandum of Understanding or Agreement) be obtained prior to 
connecting with other systems and/or sharing sensitive data/information.  The 
written authorization shall detail the rules of behavior and controls that must 
be maintained by the interconnecting systems.  A description of the rules for 
interconnecting systems and for protecting shared data must be included with 
this security plan.

In this section, provide the following information concerning the authorization 
for the connection to other systems or the sharing of information:
 
* List of interconnected systems (including Internet);

* Unique system identifiers, if appropriate;

* Name of system(s);

* Organization owning the other system(s);

* Type of interconnection (TCP/IP, Dial, SNA, etc.);

* Short discussion of major concerns or considerations in determining 
interconnection;

* Name and title of authorizing management official(s);

* Date of authorization;

* System of Record, if applicable (Privacy Act data);

* Sensitivity level of each system;

* Interaction among systems; and

* Security concerns and Rules of Behavior (see Appendices A and B of the guide) 
of the other systems that need to be considered in the protection of this 
system.

Sensitivity of Information Handled
This section provides a description of the types of information handled by the 
system and an analysis of the criticality of the information.  The sensitivity 
and criticality of the information stored within, processed by, or transmitted 
by a system provides a basis for the value of the system and is one of the major 
factors in risk management.  The description will provide information to a 
variety of users, including:

* Analysts/programmers who will use it to help design appropriate security 
controls;

* Internal and external auditors evaluating system security measures; and

* Managers making decisions about the reasonableness of security 
countermeasures.

The nature of the information sensitivity and criticality must be described in 
this section.  The description must contain information on applicable laws, 
regulations, and policies affecting the system and a general description of 
sensitivity.

The remainder of the guidance document details the management, operational, and 
technical controls, discussed for both major applications and general support 
systems.  Appendices include Rules of Behavior, templates for security plans, a 
glossary, references, and an index.

For more information
The planning guideline is available at http://csrc.nist.gov/nistpubs/ for 
download in Microsoft Word '97 (.doc) and Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) formats.  Paper 
copies can be ordered from the Government Printing Office at (202) 512-1800; the 
order number is SN003-003-03590-4 and the price is $14.00.  Paper copies are 
also available from the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) at (703) 
605-6000; order number is PB99-105116.

