Cryptography Standards and Infrastructures for the Twenty-First Century

The Internet is opening up new ways for consumers, industry, and governments to 
conduct business and to exchange information electronically.  Electronic 
ordering and payments can be handled efficiently and conveniently over the 
network.  Electronic mail and informational Web pages have become institutional 
resources.  Yet the full benefits of electronic commerce and information 
exchanges will not be realized until users have sufficient trust and confidence 
in the security and privacy of their information. 
  
The President's Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection recently issued 
a report on the threats to telecommunications, energy, banking and finance, and 
other systems critical to the government and economy of the U.S.  The Commission 
warned that people may not be willing to use the Internet for commerce if they 
do not have confidence that their communications and data are safe from 
unauthorized access or modification.  Further, the Commission noted that secure 
and reliable telecommunications networks must have effective ways for 
authenticating information and assuring the confidentiality of information.  
There is no single technology or technique that will produce the needed security 
and reliability of networks.  A range of technologies, including cryptography, 
improved identification and authentication technologies, and firewalls, will be 
required, along with trusted encryption key and security management 
infrastructures. 

Cryptography has had, and will continue to have, an important role in protecting 
information both within a computer system and when information is sent over the 
Internet and other unprotected communications channels.  Cryptography serves 
many functions in secure business transactions by providing ways to assure data 
confidentiality, data integrity, authentication of message originator, user 
authentication, electronic certification of data, and nonrepudiation.

This bulletin reports on the progress being made by NIST and by its government 
and industry partners to advance the development of electronic commerce systems 
in which users will have confidence.  There are efforts underway to update 
existing standards for cryptography; to develop new and stronger forms of 
encryption; and to create infrastructures that will support safe electronic 
transactions in future networks. 

Data Encryption Standard 

The two basic components of cryptography are the algorithm or cryptographic 
methodology used, and the key.  In modern systems, algorithms are complex 
mathematical formulae and keys are strings of bits. The Data Encryption Standard 
(DES), issued in 1977, provides an encryption algorithm for protecting federal 
unclassified information from unauthorized disclosure or undetected modification 
during transmission or while in storage. The standard is based on secret key 
cryptography.  The algorithm is publicly known; the key system is symmetric with 
the same key used for encrypting and decrypting information, and the keys must 
be kept secret.  The standard was initially issued for government use. It was 
subsequently adopted as a voluntary industry standard (American National 
Standard X3.92 1981/R1987) and has been widely implemented by the private 
sector. It is based on the work of the International Business Machines 
Corporation. 

Under the provisions of the DES, NIST is required to conduct a review every five 
years to determine whether the cryptographic algorithm specified by the standard 
should be affirmed, revised, or withdrawn. The first review resulted in the 
reaffirmation of the standard in 1983; the standard was again reaffirmed in 1988 
following a second review; as a result of the third review,  which was completed 
in 1993, the DES was reaffirmed for use through 1998 as Federal Information 
Processing Standard (FIPS) 46-2. 

Triple DES. A more secure method for using the DES algorithm in three 
operations, called Triple DES, has been developed by the private sector. Triple 
Data Encryption Algorithm mode of operations and implementation methods have 
been documented and specified as draft American National Standards (X9.52 and 
X9.65) by Accredited Standards Committee X9 for Financial Services.  This 
committee develops cryptography and public key infrastructure standards for the 
banking community. Federal organizations that need security beyond that provided 
by the DES can use these standards. 

Strength of the DES. The continued security of the DES has been questioned as 
the result of various attempts to break the algorithm.  The security provided by 
DES cryptographic systems depends on the mathematical soundness of the 
algorithm, length of the keys, key management, mode of operation, and 
implementation. 

It is expected that people will continue to try to attack the DES, and other 
encryption algorithms as well.  Successful attacks on the DES have been brute 
force attacks, which have tried all possible keys for a given encryption until 
the correct key is found.  Motivated by a well-publicized competition in 1997, 
successful attackers organized teams of people and tens of thousands of 
computers that worked for months to break one message.  In July 1998, the New 
York Times reported that a group of computer experts had succeeded in breaking a 
DES-encoded message by building a cracking machine costing $250,000.  The 
machine, consisting of 27 boards each holding 64 chips, took 56 hours to recover 
a DES key and decipher an encrypted message.  This most recent attack appears to 
demonstrate that a single determined attacker can develop an effective DES 
cracking machine. In some cases, the attack may not pose an immediate or 
significant threat.  However, organizations may wish to consider making the 
transition to the use of Triple DES, matching the strength of the protective 
measures against the associated risks. 

In consultation with other organizations, NIST is developing plans for its next 
steps concerning the DES.  One option under consideration is to revise the 
applicability provisions of the standard to recommend that agencies use multiple 
DES iterations, such as Triple DES, to protect highly sensitive data and data 
that requires long-term protection for confidentiality.     

Escrowed Encryption Standard

FIPS 185, Escrowed Encryption Standard, specifies the SKIPJACK algorithm which 
federal agencies can use for protecting the confidentiality of data.  When 
originally issued, the SKIPJACK algorithm and the Key Exchange Algorithm used 
with SKIPJACK were classified secret.  Recently, the Department of Defense 
announced that it had declassified both algorithms in an effort to encourage the 
development of reasonably priced and interoperable computer protection products 
for the Defense Message System and other Department of Defense applications. 

Review of FIPS 140-1, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules

Issued in 1994, FIPS 140-1 specifies the overall requirements for the design and 
implementation of modules that use cryptographic algorithms and methods.  The 
standard identifies requirements for four security levels for cryptographic 
modules to provide for different sensitivity levels of data from low value to 
high value, and for many different applications.  Like the DES, this standard 
also calls for a review by NIST every five years.  

The first planned review of FIPS 140-1 will be announced in the Federal Register 
later this year.  Public comments will be solicited on the continued usefulness 
of the standard and on any requirements for revisions that may be needed to meet 
the challenges of technological and economic change.  

NIST has established a program to validate cryptographic modules for correct 
implementation of cryptography standards.  This effort is carried out under the 
auspices of the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP), and 
in cooperation with the Communications Security Establishment (CSE) of the 
Government of Canada.  A list of validated products is maintained by NIST and is 
available on the Web site listed at the end of this bulletin.  

Expansion of the Digital Signature Standard 

Public key cryptography uses two keys:  a private key and a public key.  The 
private key cannot be derived from the public key.  FIPS 186, Digital Signature 
Standard (DSS), specifies the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA), that is used in 
conjunction with FIPS 180-1, Secure Hash Algorithm, for applications requiring 
the authentication of data integrity and the identity of the signer.   FIPS 186 
provides cryptographic techniques based on public key cryptography for 
generating and verifying electronic signatures, which can be used to verify the 
origin and contents of a message.  FIPS 180-1 specifies a Secure Hash Algorithm 
(SHA-1) which can be used to generate a condensed representation of a message 
called a message digest. These techniques, that were developed for the federal 
government, are also implemented in commercial products and used by both the 
public and private sectors.

Last year, NIST proposed expanding the Digital Signature Standard to include 
additional signature algorithms that the federal government could endorse to 
authenticate electronic information and transactions and to assure high levels 
of integrity. Most of the federal organizations responding to our request for 
comments supported the addition of alternative signature algorithms.  We have 
identified RSA and Elliptic Curve Cryptography technology as potential new 
algorithms for inclusion in a revised FIPS 186.  Both techniques have been 
proposed as voluntary industry standards.  Seeking to be consistent with the 
actions in the voluntary standards community, we are awaiting the completion of 
the industry standardization processes before proceeding with the revision of 
the FIPS to include the RSA technique and Elliptic Curve Cryptography 
technology.  When approved by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
as voluntary industry standards, we intend to take appropriate steps to gain 
approval and to advise federal agencies that they can use these standards in 
addition to the DSA.
 
Development of the Advanced Encryption Standard  

Last year, we also announced that we would begin a multi-year project to develop 
an Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) which would provide cryptographic 
protection for data well into the next century.   Planned as a government and 
industry cooperative effort, the AES project has elicited considerable public 
attention and involvement.  More than fifty public comments were received on the 
minimum acceptability requirements and the criteria that were drafted to 
evaluate candidate algorithms for the AES.  More than 75 individuals from 
industry and government agencies attended a workshop held in April 1997 to 
refine the requirements and criteria. 

A call for candidate algorithms based on the jointly developed requirements and 
criteria was announced in the Federal Register (September 12, 1997, Volume 62, 
Number 177, Pages 48051-48058). By the submission deadline of  June 15, 1998, we 
had received 21 submissions, including many from U.S. industry.  Fifteen of 
these met NIST's submission requirements and minimum acceptability criteria.  
The fifteen candidate algorithms were announced at a conference held in Ventura, 
California, on August 20-22, 1998.  We plan to work with the cryptographic 
research community in evaluating the candidate proposals.  After reviews and 
tests of implementations for efficiency, we will narrow the candidate proposals 
to approximately five, and invite further review and analysis.  The AES is 
planned to be an unclassified, publicly disclosed symmetric key encryption 
algorithm that will be available royalty-free worldwide.  

Key Agreement or Exchange

Cryptographic services depend on the secure generation and distribution of keys 
(public and private).  Key management services are needed to support 
authentication, integrity, and confidentiality of information.  NIST has 
solicited comments on technologies that could be considered for the design and 
implementation of federal key agreement and exchange systems for public key-
based cryptography.  Key exchange technologies under consideration are RSA, 
Elliptic Curve, and Diffie-Hellman technologies to give federal organizations 
broad flexibility in using cryptographic systems.  We will await the completion 
of the voluntary standards processes before proposing a federal standard for key 
agreement and exchange. 

Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)

Several activities are underway to support the development of a public key 
infrastructure which provides the means to bind the public keys used in 
cryptographic functions to their owners and to distribute keys in large 
heterogeneous networks. The use of PKI technology can help to increase 
confidence in electronic transactions and allow parties without prior knowledge 
of each other to conduct verifiable transactions.   

PKI Pilots. NIST is working with the Federal PKI Steering Committee (a committee 
established by the Government Information Technology Services [GITS] Board) to 
promote the consideration and use of public key technology by federal agencies 
in the performance of intra-agency and interagency business and in transactions 
with trading partners and the public. Established under Executive Order 13011, 
GITS is conducting demonstration projects, pilots, and proof-of-concept projects 
in support of the Administration's National Partnership for Reinventing 
Government (formerly the National Performance Review) initiative to make 
government work better and cost less by reengineering through information 
technology.  NIST also works with industry groups including the Internet 
Engineering Task Force PKIX Working Group and the Accredited Standards Committee 
X9.

Interoperability Specifications.  In conjunction with ten research partners 
under a cooperative research and development agreement (CRADA), NIST completed a 
Minimum Interoperability Specification for Public Key Infrastructure Components 
(MISPC). Based on analysis of implementations of PKI components provided by the 
CRADA participants, the specification provides a minimal set of features, 
transactions, and data formats for various certificate management components 
that make up a PKI. The MISPC can be used by industry and government 
organizations in acquiring PKI components and services.  NIST is developing a 
laboratory-based reference implementation of the MISPC as a proof of concept and 
to enable developers of PKI systems to test their implementations.  Future 
laboratory work will be directed toward developing a test suite to provide the 
means for the validation of the interoperability of PKI systems.  

PKI product developers are beginning to incorporate parts of the MISPC into 
their products.  This is the start of the development of secure, interoperable 
PKI implementations that will provide security services for confidentiality and 
digital signatures and enable secure electronic business transactions.  Under a 
second CRADA with 16 industry partners, we are expanding the MISPC to 
incorporate support for confidentiality components.  In addition, we are 
defining technical security requirements for PKI components.

Key Recovery 

NIST is exploring the use of key recovery technology through a broad agency 
announcement for several agency pilot projects and with the help of a technical 
advisory committee.  An announcement in the Commerce Business Daily last year 
solicited proposals for products and services that will demonstrate the 
viability of an infrastructure for key recovery.  NIST has participated in a Key 
Recovery Demonstration Project involving several government agencies to 
demonstrate techniques to recover keys used in data encryption and to identify, 
test, and evaluate different key recovery products and services.  Planned 
laboratory work includes development of conformance tests and techniques for 
integrating key recovery components into larger functional systems.
 
This effort supports the Administration's policies on privacy, commerce, 
security, and public safety in the Global Information Infrastructure.  Concerned 
about potential harm to law enforcement and national security from the use of 
unrecoverable encryption, the Administration backs the development of a key 
management infrastructure to protect U.S. national security, foreign policy, and 
law enforcement interests.  A technical advisory committee to develop a FIPS for 
the federal key management infrastructure has been established to provide 
industry advice on encryption key recovery techniques for use by federal 
government agencies. The Committee currently includes 20 industry members.  The 
Committee has developed a draft key recovery model and specifications for the 
security and functionality of key recovery components.  The draft specifications 
are available to industry organizations that wish to develop products that meet 
customer requirements for key recovery.  The specifications are available for 
review at the Web site listed at the end of this bulletin. 

Export Controls on Cryptography

The Administration has announced changes to the export control rules for 
encryption items on the U.S. Munitions List.  Except for those items 
specifically designed, developed, configured, adapted, or modified for military 
applications, control of the export of encryption items has been transferred to 
the Department of Commerce.  One of the options allowed under the revised rules 
is the export and re-export of non-recoverable encryption items up to 56-bit key 
length DES or equivalent strength after a one-time review of the strength of the 
item and if the exporter makes satisfactory commitments to build and/or market 
recoverable encryption items, to support an international key management 
infrastructure.  This policy applies to hardware and software and will last 
through December 31, 1998.  Many U.S. vendors are planning key recovery products 
as part of the licensing provisions under the Department of Commerce's export 
control regulations.  

The Department of Commerce continues to review the export control policies and 
recently announced that it had completed guidelines to allow the export of U.S.-
manufactured encryption products of any bit-length when used by banks, financial 
institutions, and their branches around the world to secure private electronic 
transactions.  The new guidelines will allow for the export of strong encryption 
products, with or without recovery features, to eligible institutions without a 
license, after a one-time review.  Eligible institutions include banks, security 
firms, brokers, and credit card companies in 45 countries.  The 45 eligible 
countries are either members of the international anti-money laundering accord, 
the Financial Action Task Force, or have enacted anti-money laundering laws. 

Summary

As the use of information technology expands rapidly, the need for advanced 
cryptography and high-quality security techniques and services increases. NIST 
is working with government and industry organizations to make cryptography and 
security services available for all to use in exploiting fully the benefits of 
the Internet. 

For More Information

About NIST's Computer Security activities
http://www.itl.nist.gov/div893/

About changes to FIPS 186
http://csrc.nist.gov/encryption/186cmts.txt

About changes to FIPS 185
http://csrc.nist.gov/encryption/skipjack-kea.htm

About the Advanced Encryption Standard
http://www.nist.gov/aes

About proposals for key exchange and agreement
http://csrc.nist.gov/encryption/keyxcmts.txt

About GITS pilot tests using public key technology
http://gits-sec.treas.gov/fpki.htm

About NIST's Public Key Infrastructure projects
http://csrc.nist.gov/pki/

About key recovery
http://csrc.nist.gov/tacdfipsfkmi/
http://gits-sec.treas.gov/krdp.htm

About FIPS validation programs
http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval/

About export control policies
http://www.bxa.doc.gov

7


7



